Title: Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision's Analogies, Part 1

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17229v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 01:05:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies 

Part 1: Probability Theory → Representation Theory Alexandre Linhares ∗

April 2026 

Abstract 

Project Yanasse presents a method for discovering new proofs of theorems in one area of mathematics by transferring proof strategy patterns (e.g., Lean 4 tactic invocation patterns) from a structurally distant area. The system extracts tactic usage distributions across 27 top-level areas of Mathlib (217,133 proof states), computes z-scores to identify tactics that are heavily used in a source area but rare or absent in a target area, matches source and target proof states via GPU-accelerated NP-hard analogy (running on a MacBook Air via Apple’s MPS backend), and then asks an AI reasoning agent to semantically adapt —not symbol-substitute—the source tactic’s invocation pattern to the target theorem. In this first part of the study, the method is applied to the pair Probability →

RepresentationTheory , producing 4 Lean-verified new proofs out of 10 attempts (40%). The proofs compile with zero sorry declarations. The key finding is that tactic schemas decompose into a head (domain-gated, rarely transfers) and a modifier (domain-general, often transfers): 

filter upwards ’s head fails in representation theory (no Filter structure), but its [LIST] with ω modifier transfers cleanly as ext1 + simp [LIST] + rfl .Crucially, the underlying matching engine— deep vision lib.py —is entirely domain-independent: the same optimization code for an NP-hard matching that matches chess positions by analogy matches Lean proof states by analogy, without knowing which domain it is processing. Only a relation extractor is domain-specific. 

> ∗

alexandre@linhares.ltd. Affiliations: Getulio Vargas Foundation and ARGO LABS 

1

> arXiv:2604.17229v1 [cs.AI] 19 Apr 2026 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026.

# Contents 

1 Introduction 3

1.1 Deep Vision: from chess to proofs via analogy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31.2 The Yanasse question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51.3 Results preview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

2 Methodology 6

2.1 Tactic schema extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.2 z-score computation and pair selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.3 Deep Vision and GPU-accelerated analogy matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.4 Semantic adaptation protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

3 Results: Probability → Representation Theory 8

3.1 New proof P1: filter upwards → ext1 + simp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93.2 New proof P2: congr with ξ→ span le.2 + rintro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 3.3 New proof P3: any goals → any goals rfl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 3.4 New proof P4: by cases → case split on morphism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 

4 The (Head, Modifier) Decomposition 12 5 A Three-Way Taxonomy of Tactic Transferability 12 6 Failures and Their Diagnoses 13 7 Discussion 13 

7.1 What the proofs are and are not . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 7.2 Domain independence of the matching engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 7.3 Cost and scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 7.4 The calibration failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 7.5 Deep Vision vs. deep neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 

8 Conclusion and Future Work 14 A Lean Code: New Proofs 18 

A.1 Item 0: εToSingle 0 comp eq via ext1 + simp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 A.2 Item 1: Coinvariants.le comap ker via span le.2 + rintro . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 A.3 Item 6: εToSingle 0 comp eq via any goals rfl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 A.4 Item 8: equivalenceModuleMonoidAlgebra naturality via by cases . . . . . . . . . 21 2Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

# 1 Introduction 

Can a technique that is routine in one area of mathematics be “rediscovered” in a distant area where it is unknown? The question is old. Erd˝ os’s notion of proofs from THE BOOK celebrates cases where a surprising proof method—originating in one branch—illuminates a theorem in another. But these transfers have historically been found by human insight, often by mathematicians fluent in both areas. Project Yanasse asks whether such transfers can be found systematically , by treating the problem as one of analogy. 

1.1 Deep Vision: from chess to proofs via analogy 

The Deep Vision framework [1, 18] grows out of the Fluid Analogies Research Group (FARG) tradition [2 – 11], which holds that analogy-making—perceiving shared relational structure across superficially different situations—is the core of cognition. The framework represents any structured domain as a relational network : entities connected by typed, directed relations. A analogy optimiza-tion finds the entity permutation that maximizes relational consistency between two networks. The matching code ( deep vision lib.py ) is entirely domain-independent: it receives two relational structures and returns a similarity score and entity correspondence, without knowing which domain it is processing. 

Chess analogies. In chess [12 –17], entities are pieces and relations are attack, defense, blocking, confinement, and pinning. Two pieces in entirely different positions can play “the same role” if their relational profiles match: a White Pawn defended by its king and attacked by a knight is relationally identical to a White Rook defended by its queen and attacked by a pawn—both are “guarded pieces facing a threat,” regardless of piece type or square. Deep Vision solves chess analogies that are genuinely difficult. Consider the Wilkins position [12]— a complex 12-piece endgame with interlocked pawn chains and a promotion threat—matched against a minimal 5-piece pawn-promotion endgame: 

# 0Z0Z0Z0Z Z0ZkZ0Z0 0Z0ZpOpZ Z0ZpO0O0 0ZpO0Z0Z Z0O0Z0Z0 0Z0J0Z0Z Z0Z0Z0ZB 

> Wilkins Position (12 pieces)

# 0Z0Z0Z0Z oPZ0j0Z0 PZ0Z0Z0Z Z0J0Z0Z0 0Z0Z0Z0Z Z0Z0Z0Z0 0Z0Z0Z0Z Z0Z0Z0Z0 

> Pawn Promotion Endgame (5 pieces)

Despite the surface difference (12 vs. 5 pieces, bishop vs. no bishop, pawn chains vs. open board), the matcher discovers that the promoting pawn, the locked pawns, and the confined king play the same abstract roles in both positions. Or consider Fool’s Mate matched against a sparse endgame: 3Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

# rmbZkans opopZpop 0Z0Z0Z0Z Z0Z0o0Z0 0Z0Z0ZPl Z0Z0ZPZ0 POPOPZ0O SNAQJBMR 

Fool’s Mate ( 1. f3 e5 2. g4 Qh4# )

# 0Z0Z0Z0Z Z0Z0Z0Z0 0Z0Z0Z0Z Z0Z0Z0Z0 0Z0Z0Z0Z Z0Z0Z0a0 0ZkZPZ0Z Z0Z0JBZ0 

Endgame (Ke1, Bf1, Pe2 vs. kc2, bg3) 

In both positions the White King on e1 has zero mobility, and the White Bishop on f 1 is confined behind its own pawn on e2. The matcher identifies that the Black Queen in Fool’s Mate and the Black Bishop in the endgame play the same confinement role with respect to the White King—a 16-piece opening and a 5-piece endgame, recognized as “the same situation.” Perhaps the most striking test involves the Linhares–Chada reconstruction experiment [16]. A chess expert was shown a complex 19-piece position with a back-rank mating threat for 5 seconds and asked to reconstruct it from memory. The reconstruction contained only 15 pieces—52% were misplaced or omitted—yet the strategic essence was preserved: 

# 0S0Z0ZkZ Z0ZrS0Zp 0Z0Z0mpZ Z0opZpZ0 0ZqZ0Z0Z Z0O0Z0Z0 0Z0LNZPO s0Z0Z0AK 

Original position (19 pieces) 

# 0S0Z0ZkZ Z0Z0L0Zp 0Zpo0mpZ Z0ZqZpZ0 0Z0Z0Z0Z Z0Z0Z0Z0 0Z0Z0ZPO ZRZ0Z0AK 

Expert’s reconstruction (15 pieces) 

The expert replaced White’s Rook on e7 with a Queen on e7—a different piece type, but one that preserves the back-rank threat: control of e8, f 7, and the entire seventh rank. The matcher discovers exactly this: the reconstructed Qe7 absorbs the roles of both the original Qd2 and Re7. Symmetrically, on the Black side, the reconstructed qd5 absorbs the roles of both the original qc4and rd7. Despite half the pieces being wrong, the relational structure—who attacks whom, who confines whom, who defends whom—is preserved, and the matcher sees this, achieving 4/4 key mappings on this case. Across the full battery of test cases (double checks, guardian patterns, Linhares–Chada recon-structions), the integrated matcher achieves 15/15 key mappings [1]. 

From chess to proofs. The same matching engine, with only the relation extractor swapped, handles Lean 4 proof states: entities become hypotheses, goals, and types; relations become rewrite, 4Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

fit/apply, head-match, structure, equality, reflexive, witness, bidirectional, kernel/simp, decidable, and lemma-needed (14 relation types). No chess knowledge is used; no proof-specific heuristics are added to the matcher. The proof-state matcher has previously been used to discover a formal proof of Wolstenholme’s theorem [35] in Lean 4 (see also [36]). This domain independence is what enables the present paper: the engine that perceives “this pawn plays the same role as that rook” also perceives “this probability proof state is structurally similar to that representation-theory proof state.” 

1.2 The Yanasse question 

This paper instantiates the Deep Vision framework for a new task: cross-area tactic transfer in formal mathematics . We formalize the question as follows: 1. Distribution extraction. For each of the 27 top-level Mathlib namespaces (areas), compute the frequency of each tactic schema—a tuple ( head , arity , has with , uses lemma )—across all 217,133 extracted proof states. 2. z-score ranking. For each (area, schema) pair, compute the z-score of the schema’s frequency relative to the population of all 27 areas. A schema with z ≥ +2 in area S and z ≤ − 1 (or absent) in area T is a transfer candidate from S to T .3. Relational matching. Sample source proofs from S that use the schema. For each, run the GPU-accelerated matcher against all proof states in T to find the structurally closest analogue .4. Semantic adaptation. An AI reasoning agent reads the source theorem and proof, reads the target theorem, understands what mathematical step the source tactic accomplishes, and designs a target-appropriate tactic that accomplishes the analogous step using the target area’s actual hypotheses and lemmas. This is not symbol substitution. 5. Verification. The adapted tactic is compiled in Lean 4 with Mathlib. If lake env lean 

returns exit code 0 with no sorry , the transfer is verified. The name “Yanasse” honors Horacio Hideki Yanasse, the first author’s PhD advisor, who taught that the best ideas cross disciplinary boundaries. 

1.3 Results preview 

This paper is Part 1 of the study, applying the method to the pair Probability → Representa-tionTheory . It produces: 

• 4 Lean-verified new proofs out of 10 schema transfer attempts (40% success rate). 

• A structural finding: tactic schemas decompose into (head, modifier) with asymmetric trans-ferability (Section 4). 

• A three-way taxonomy of tactic transferability (Section 5). 

• 6 honest negative results with mathematical diagnoses (Section 6). 5Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

# 2 Methodology 

2.1 Tactic schema extraction 

We parse the metadata.json index of the Mathlib proof-state corpus (211,073 entries extracted via InfoTree walking). Each entry records a tactic string, a source file path, and structural data. For each entry with a Mathlib source path, we: 1. Derive the area from the first two components of the source path (e.g., Mathlib/Probabili-ty/Kernel/Basic.lean → Mathlib.Probability ). 2. Parse the tactic string into a schema tuple (head , arity , has with , uses lemma ) using a Unicode-aware regex that correctly handles Lean 4’s subscript and Greek-letter hypothesis names (e.g., 

h1, hμ). This yields 2,729 distinct schemas across 27 areas and 210,048 (area, schema) increments (481 curated entries without source paths and 545 unparseable tactics are excluded). 

2.2 z-score computation and pair selection 

For each (area, schema) pair, we compute: 

za,s = fa,s − ¯fs

σs

where fa,s = count a,s /total a is the schema’s frequency in area a, and ¯fs, σ s are the mean and standard deviation of f·,s across all 27 areas (including implicit zeros for areas where the schema is absent). A schema qualifies as a transfer candidate from source S to target T if zS,s ≥ 2 and zT,s ≤ − 1(or the schema is entirely absent from T ). We filter out: 

• Schemas present in fewer than 3 areas (specialized tactics with no cross-area usage evidence). 

• Hypothesis-name shortcuts (bare identifiers like hx , h1 that are Lean 4’s shorthand for exact hx , not transferable techniques). 

• Mathlib.CategoryTheory as a source area (its DSL-style tactics like cat disch dominate rankings but encode domain-specific diagrammatic reasoning, not transferable proof strategies). 

• Mathlib.Tactic , Mathlib.Control , Mathlib.Logic as target areas (infrastructure names-paces, not mathematical subject matter). Pairs are ranked by pair potential : the sum of the top-10 schema transfer gaps within each (source, target) pair, weighted by log (1 + source count ) to discriminate among schemas that saturate the z-score ceiling. 

2.3 Deep Vision and GPU-accelerated analogy matching 

Deep Vision is a analogy engine that treats a Lean 4 proof state as a network: hypotheses, goals, and types are entities; rewrite, apply, head-match, structure, equality, and other relations connect them. Deep Vision was originally designed as an AI model to solve ARC-AGI problems [19] on a smartphone, built on the principles of Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies [2, 3]. Observe 6Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

that a transformation in ARC-AGI maps to theorems naturally, as theorems are composed by transformations. Given a new proof state, the engine finds library entries whose proof states are 

relationally similar —not by surface syntax, but by the pattern of structural connections —and transfers their tactics. This aggressively prunes the search space. The engine maintains a library of 217,133 proof states extracted from Mathlib, organized by 14 relation types and indexed by relation-profile signatures for fast lookup. Crucially, deep vision lib.py —the domain-independent matching core—does not know whether it is processing chess positions, ARC-AGI grids, or Lean proof states. The same optimization code for an NP-hard matching that matches chess positions by analogy matches proof states by analogy. Only the relation extractor is domain-specific. Our approach differs from neural next-step prediction systems (Lean Copilot [20], AlphaProof [21], Aristotle [22]) in using relational analogy —structural similarity of proof states—rather than rein-forcement learning or language-model sequence prediction. This enables massive efficiency gains: the whole system runs on a single laptop. 

Hardware. All experiments were run on a MacBook Air (Apple M-series, 32 GB unified memory) using PyTorch 2.8 on the Metal Performance Shaders (MPS) backend. No external GPU, no cluster, no cloud compute. 

Matching. For each transfer candidate, we sample 8 source proofs from S that heavily use the schema, then match each against all ∼672 proof states in T using the BatchMatcher from 

deep vision cuda.py . The matcher solves an NP-hard analogy problem: given two relational structures, find the entity-to-entity correspondence that maximizes relational consistency—i.e., the assignment under which the pattern of connections in one structure best mirrors the pattern in the other. The optimization uses multi-restart augment-swap heuristics, fully tensorized on GPU (Level 3: the entire augment/swap loop stays on GPU with no per-candidate CPU round-trips). The backend auto-detects CUDA → MPS → CPU, falling back gracefully. On MPS with 32 GB unified memory, 8 source queries × 672 target candidates completes in approximately 6 minutes. Scores are normalized by √nS · nT to remove size bias. The top-5 target analogues (by normalized score) are retained for semantic adaptation. 

2.4 Semantic adaptation protocol 

For each schema’s top-1 analogy analogue, a fresh AI reasoning session (Claude Opus, spawned via the Ralph Loop driver with a 50-minute reasoning budget) performs semantic adaptation: 1. Read the source theorem statement and proof; understand what mathematical step the tactic accomplishes. 2. Read the target theorem statement; identify whether an analogous step exists in the target’s context. 3. Design a target-specific tactic using the target area’s actual hypotheses and lemmas—not regex-substituted source entity names. 4. Test multiple adapted tactics in Lean 4 (via lake env lean ), iterating on compiler feedback. 5. Write a structured why-report documenting: what the source tactic does mathematically, whether an analog exists, what was tried, what failed and why. 7Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

The why-report is the primary deliverable even when the proof does not close: it captures the mathematical reasoning that led to the negative result. 

# 3 Results: Probability → Representation Theory 

We present results for the top-ranked pair: Mathlib.Probability (30,384 tactic invocations, the largest area) → Mathlib.RepresentationTheory (672 proof states). Ten schemas were attempted; four produced Lean-verified alternative proofs. Table 1: Transfer results for Probability → Representation Theory.                                                   

> Item Schema head with Ar. Result Adaptation 0filter upwards ✓1New proof ext1 + simp [L] + rfl
> 1congr ✓0New proof span le.2 + rintro
> 2fun prop 0Failed Domain-gated (Measurable) 3ext1 1Failed Categorical ext incompat. 4all goals 1Failed Heterogeneous goals 5lift ✓5Failed No CanLift instances 6any goals 1New proof any goals rfl
> 7measurability 0Failed Domain-gated ( σ-alg.) 8by cases 4New proof Case split on morphism 9congrm 2Failed No shared outer operators

The four new proofs are: 

P1. Augmentation–homotopy-equivalence compatibility (Mathlib.Representation-Theory.Homological.Resolution ). Let k be a commutative ring and G a monoid. Denote by C• the standard bar resolution in Rep (k, G ), by ε0 : C• → k[0] the augmentation to the trivial module in degree 0, by U the forgetful functor to Mod k (applied degreewise), and by 

σ the comparison isomorphism for the single-complex functor under U . Then σ ◦ U (ε0) equals the canonical homotopy equivalence φ : U (C•) → k[0]. New proof: reduce to per-degree components by extensionality; at degrees n ≥ 1 both sides vanish; at degree 0, apply the defining equation of φ.

P2. G-invariance of the coinvariant submodule (Coinvariants module). Let S ⊴ G be a normal subgroup and ρ : G → GL (V ) a representation. The coinvariant submodule 

VS = span {ρ(s)v − v} satisfies ρ(g)( VS ) ⊆ VS for all g ∈ G. New proof: by the universal property of span, reduce to generators; conjugation by g preserves S by normality. 

P3. Augmentation–homotopy-equivalence compatibility (reproved via a different transferred schema). Same theorem as P1. New proof: explicit case split on the degree n; for n ≥ 1the equality is definitional (both sides are zero), dispatched by the transferred combinator 

any goals rfl ; degree 0 follows from the homotopy-equivalence lemma. 

P4. Naturality of the representation–module equivalence (Mathlib.Representation-Theory.Rep.Iso ). The equivalence E : Rep (k, G ) ≃ k[G]-Mod has unit isomorphism 

η : Id ⇒ E−1 ◦ E. For every G-equivariant morphism f : X → Y , the naturality square commutes: ηY ◦ f = ( E−1 ◦ E)( f ) ◦ ηX . New proof (uniform): element-wise verification by unfolding definitions. New proof (by cases): split on f = 0; both branches close identically, demonstrating the transferred pattern “case-split on a structural property.” 8Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

3.1 New proof P1: filter upwards → ext1 + simp 

Theorem. Let k be a commutative ring and G a monoid. Let C• = C•(k, G ) denote the standard bar resolution, a chain complex of G-representations. The augmentation ε0 : C• → k[0] maps to the trivial k-module concentrated in degree 0. Applying the forgetful functor U : Rep (k, G ) → Mod k

degreewise and postcomposing with the comparison isomorphism σ for the single-complex functor yields a chain map σ ◦ U (ε0) : U (C•) → k[0]. The theorem asserts that this equals the canonical homotopy equivalence φ : U (C•) ∼

−→ k[0]: 

σ ◦ U (ε0) = φ. 

Context. The bar resolution is one of the foundational constructions in group cohomology, introduced by Eilenberg and Mac Lane [23] and systematized in Cartan and Eilenberg’s Homological Algebra [24]. The standard modern treatments appear in Brown [25] (Chapter I) and Weibel [26] (Chapter 6), which establish the augmentation map and its relationship to the contracting homotopy. The Lean 4 formalization of the bar resolution, group cohomology, and the associated homological machinery in Mathlib is due to Livingston [27], whose work provides the exact definitions and API our reproof targets. Conrad’s lecture notes [28] give an accessible treatment of the bar resolution’s exactness via explicit homotopy operators, closely matching the degree-wise argument our proof exploits. 

New proof. By extensionality for morphisms of chain complexes, it suffices to verify equality at each degree n individually. At degrees n ≥ 1, the target complex k[0] is zero, so both ( σ ◦ U (ε0)) n

and φn are the zero map. At degree 0, the equality ( σ ◦ U (ε0)) 0 = φ0 follows from the defining equation of the homotopy equivalence. 

Source pattern. In Mathlib.Probability.Independence.Conditional , the theorem iCondIn-depSets iff uses:              

> filter_upwards [ h_eq sfhf , h_inter_eq sfhf , h ’] with omega h_eq h_inter_eq h ’

This tactic performs two coordinated steps: (1) the list argument combines three almost-everywhere hypotheses by intersecting co-null sets (the countable intersection of co-null sets is co-null via 

Filter.Eventually.and ); (2) the with-clause introduces a fresh generic point ω with named pointwise hypotheses. 

Adaptation. The literal head filter upwards fails immediately: its elaborator requires a Fil-ter.Eventually or s ∈ f goal shape, which a chain-complex morphism equality does not have. However, the invocation pattern —“reduce a holistic goal to a pointwise obligation on a fresh el-ement, importing a list of named lemmas”—has a structural analog. ext1 plays the role of the 

with -clause (introduces a fresh degree index n), and simp [LIST] plays the role of the [LIST] 

argument (coordinates named lemmas to close the degree-0 case). 

Analogy matching. This was the first item to use GPU-accelerated matching (earlier items used Jaccard-on-relation-set, which saturated at score 1.0). Analogy scores for the top-5 analogues were 5.30, 5.00, 4.74, 4.33, 4.33—genuinely discriminating. All five matched against the same source proof ( iCondIndepSets iff ), suggesting it has unusually rich relational structure. 9Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

3.2 New proof P2: congr with ξ → span le.2 + rintro 

Theorem. Let G be a group, S ⊴ G a normal subgroup, and ρ : G → GL (V ) a k-linear representation. The coinvariant submodule is 

VS = span ρ(s) v − v s ∈ S, v ∈ V .

The theorem asserts that VS is stable under the G-action: for every g ∈ G,

ρ(g)( VS ) ⊆ VS .

Context. Coinvariants—the quotient V /V S dual to the invariant submodule V S —are a basic tool in group cohomology. The G-stability of VS when S ⊴ G is a prerequisite for the inflation–restriction exact sequence; see Weibel [26] ( §6.8) and Sharifi [29] (Chapter 2). In modular representation theory, the ring of coinvariants k[V ]G = k[V ]/⟨k[V ]G

> +

⟩ is studied by Shank and Wehlau [30], who construct explicit bases and Gr¨ obner-basis descriptions. Brown [25] (Chapter III) treats the conjugation argument for normal subgroups in the classical setting. The Lean formalization in 

Mathlib.RepresentationTheory.Coinvariants is again due to Livingston [27]. 

New proof. By the universal property of span, it suffices to show that each generator ρ(s) v − v

maps into VS under ρ(g). For s ∈ S and v ∈ V :

ρ(g) ρ(s) v − v = ρ(g s ) v − ρ(g) v = ρ(g s g −1) ρ(g) v − ρ(g) v. 

Since S is normal in G, the element g s g −1 lies in S, so the right-hand side is a generator of VS .

Source pattern. In Mathlib.Probability.Kernel.Representation , the theorem exists measurable map eq unitInterval aux uses congr with ξ to reduce an equality of measurable-set comprehensions to a pointwise biconditional over the fresh variable ξ.

Adaptation. The literal head congr fails because the target goal is ≤ (inclusion), not = (equality). The error is diagnostic: congr successfully unfolds ≤ to ∀x, x ∈ A → x ∈ B via SetLike.le def ,but then fails at the extensionality step because the unfolded form is an implication, not an equality. The semantic analog of “ congr with ξ”—peeling a structural wrapper to a pointwise obligation on a fresh element—is the universal property of span (reducing span G ≤ B to G ⊆ B) followed by introducing and destructuring the generator. 

3.3 New proof P3: any goals → any goals rfl 

Theorem. Same as P1: σ ◦ U (ε0) = φ (augmentation–homotopy-equivalence compatibility for the bar resolution). 

New proof. By extensionality, reduce to per-degree components. Case-split on n: for n ≥ 1, the target complex k[0] has trivial components, so ( σ ◦ U (ε0)) n = 0 = φn by definitional equality. For n = 0, apply the defining equation of φ. The proof differs from P1 in how the trivial case is dispatched: the transferred combinator any goals rfl closes the n ≥ 1 branch by reflexivity while leaving the nontrivial n = 0 branch untouched. 

Source pattern. In Mathlib.Probability.Kernel.IonescuTulcea.Traj , the tactic any goals lia dispatches trivial arithmetic side-conditions after a case split. 10 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

Adaptation. The source pattern “split, then use any goals to mop up the easy cases” adapts directly. After decomposing the chain-map equality into a degree-0 and a degree-( n+ 1) goal, 

any goals rfl dispatches the trivial branch (both sides are definitionally zero), leaving only the degree-0 case for the homotopy-equivalence lemma. 

Contrast with item 4 ( all goals ). all goals failed on the same target because it requires 

all sub-goals to be closed by one tactic. After use , the target produces two heterogeneous goals (a homology-class equality and a cycle-membership proof); no single decision procedure closes both. 

any goals tolerates this heterogeneity by succeeding if any sub-goal closes. This contrast directly motivates the taxonomy in Section 5. 

3.4 New proof P4: by cases → case split on morphism 

Theorem. Let k be a commutative ring and G a monoid. There is a standard equivalence of categories E : Rep (k, G ) ≃ k[G]-Mod between G-representations over k and modules over the monoid algebra k[G], with unit isomorphism η : Id ⇒ E−1 ◦ E. The theorem asserts that η is natural: for every G-equivariant morphism f : X → Y ,

ηY ◦ f = ( E−1 ◦ E)( f ) ◦ ηX .

Context. The equivalence between G-representations and modules over the group algebra is one of the oldest identifications in representation theory, implicit in the work of Frobenius and made explicit by Noether [34]. Serre [31] ( §1.2) and Curtis and Reiner [32] (Chapter I) treat it as a foundational isomorphism of categories; modern accounts include Webb [33] (Chapter 1). The specific result that 

η is a natural isomorphism—not merely a pointwise bijection—is a consequence of the general theory of Morita equivalences, though in this case the proof is a direct unfolding of definitions. In the Lean formalization, the equivalence is constructed in Mathlib.RepresentationTheory.Rep.Iso .

New proof (uniform). For each element x ∈ X, unfold the definitions of ηX , ηY , and the functorial action of E−1 ◦ E on f , and verify the equality directly. Both sides reduce to the same expression, so the proof closes by reflexivity. 

New proof (by cases). Case-split on f = 0. If f = 0, both sides of the naturality square vanish ( η is a natural isomorphism and the zero morphism is mapped to zero), so the equality holds by simplification. If f̸ = 0, proceed as in the uniform proof. The split is mathematically unnecessary—both branches close identically—but demonstrates that the probability-theory pattern “case-split on a structural property” transfers as a valid proof strategy. 

Source pattern. In probability theory, by cases h ι : Nonempty ι splits on the emptiness of an index type to handle the vacuous case separately—a standard guard against degenerate probability spaces with empty index sets. 

Adaptation. The semantic analog of “split on emptiness” is “split on whether the morphism is zero.” In an abelian category, f = 0 is a natural structural dichotomy, just as “ ι is empty” is a natural structural dichotomy for index types in probability. 11 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

# 4 The (Head, Modifier) Decomposition 

Finding 1 (Head–modifier asymmetry) . Tactic schemas decompose into a head (the tactic name: 

filter upwards , congr , simp , etc.) and a modifier (the argument structure: with -clause, bracketed lemma list, arity pattern). When transferred across distant areas: 

• The head is typically domain-gated : its elaborator requires domain-specific goal shapes (Filter.Eventually for filter upwards , = for congr , CanLift instances for lift ). It rarely transfers directly. 

• The modifier often expresses a domain-general proof pattern (“introduce a fresh element,” “coordinate over a list of facts,” “dispatch any trivial sub-goal”) that has analogs across areas. Evidence: items 0 and 1 both succeed by transferring the modifier (the with -clause / [LIST] 

structure) while replacing the head with a target-area-specific reduction lemma. Item 5 ( lift with ... ) fails despite having a modifier because the head’s prerequisite is not merely a goal-shape requirement but a type-system requirement (CanLift instances), which no modifier can circumvent. 

# 5 A Three-Way Taxonomy of Tactic Transferability 

The 10 transfer attempts suggest a three-way classification: 1. Domain-gated heads (filter upwards , fun prop , lift , measurability ). The head re-quires domain-specific types, instances, or goal shapes. Transfer succeeds only if the modifier carries independent content (items 0, 1); fails otherwise (items 2, 5, 7). 2. Domain-general combinators (any goals , by cases , congr ). The head is syntactic glue or a domain-independent reasoning pattern. Transfers on its own or with minimal adaptation (items 1, 6, 8). 3. Homogeneity-sensitive combinators (all goals ). The head requires all sub-goals to share a uniform structure. Fails on heterogeneous construction proofs where sub-goals have different types (item 4). Table 2: Three-way taxonomy with evidence from 10 transfer attempts. Category Examples New proof Failed 1. Domain-gated filter upwards , fun prop , lift , measurability 2 32. Domain-general any goals , by cases , congr 2 03. Homogeneity-sensitive all goals 0 1

Total 4 4    

> Note: ext1 (item 3) and congrm (item 9) are borderline between categories 1 and 3; both fail due to structural incompatibilities specific to categorical contexts.

12 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

# 6 Failures and Their Diagnoses 

Each failed transfer produced a structured why-report explaining the mathematical root cause. We summarize: 

Item 2: fun prop . fun prop is a predicate-closure tactic that handles Measurable , Continuous ,and Differentiable goals. Representation theory has zero such goal types; its goals are algebraic (submodule inclusion, kernel membership). Category mismatch, not adaptation failure. 

Item 3: ext1 (arity 1). In probability, ext1 n introduces a universally quantified binder (e.g., over sample-space elements). In representation theory, HomologicalComplex.Hom.ext does not produce a ∀-quantified binder—it directly specializes to a specific chain-complex de-gree. The arity-1 form (naming the binder) is structurally incompatible with categorical extensionality lemmas. 

Item 4: all goals . After use in the target proof, two sub-goals arise: a homology-class equality and a cycle-membership proof. These are mathematically heterogeneous : no single decision procedure (not linarith , not simp , not rfl ) closes both. Contrast with any goals (item 6), which tolerates heterogeneity. 

Item 5: lift . lift requires CanLift typeclass instances (e.g., R∞≥0 → R≥0, Z → N). Representa-tion theory has zero such instances and zero WithTop /ENNReal types. This is a type-system incompatibility, not a goal-shape mismatch; the modifier ( with -clause) cannot circumvent it. 

Item 7: measurability . A σ-algebra predicate closure tactic with no representation-theory coun-terpart. Same category as fun prop (domain-gated automation). 

Item 9: congrm . congrm requires shared outer-operator patterns (integrals, products) between goal LHS and RHS. Homological algebra’s morphism-composition equalities do not exhibit such patterns. 

# 7 Discussion 

7.1 What the proofs are and are not 

The four new proofs are correct new proofs of existing Mathlib theorems. They are not shorter than the originals: the Mathlib proofs use 3–4 expert-level one-liners ( simpa using X.symm ), while our adapted proofs decompose the same mathematical content into 3–4 explicit tactic steps ( dsimp; ext1; simp [LIST]; rfl ). The value is not in conciseness but in the discovery process : the system identified that ext1 + simp [LIST] is the representation-theory analog of filter upwards [LIST] with ... without knowing representation theory in advance. 

7.2 Domain independence of the matching engine 

The same BatchMatcher class that computes chess-position analogy scores computes proof-state analogy scores. The only domain-specific component is the relation extractor (which maps chess positions to attack/defense/blocking matrices, and Lean proof states to rewrite/apply/head-match matrices). The optimization core—augment-swap on GPU—is identical. This suggests the framework may extend to other structured domains (program verification, circuit analysis, biological networks) with only a new relation extractor. 13 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

7.3 Cost and scalability 

The full pipeline for 10 transfer attempts on one (source, target) pair consumed approximately: 

• 7 minutes of GPU time (MPS) for analogy matching (8 source queries × 672 targets). 

• ∼8 hours of AI reasoning time across 10 semantic adaptation sessions. 

• ∼$100–150 in API cost for the reasoning sessions. The worklist contains 100 items across 10 pairs (8 target areas). At current rates, the full sweep would take ∼80 hours and ∼$1,000–1,500. 

7.4 The calibration failure 

The original calibration target— nlinarith [sq nonneg ...] transferring from Mathlib.Analysis 

to Mathlib.Combinatorics —was pinned before any data was visible. It failed: the schema is already present in Combinatorics ( z = +1 .4) and NumberTheory ( z = +2 .9), so the hypothesized “Analysis-specific” transfer does not exist in the Mathlib corpus. This is a legitimate negative finding about mathematical folklore: nlinarith with square-nonnegativity hints is not Analysis-specific in modern Lean formalization. The calibration failure is documented in full in the project’s 

calibration report.md .

7.5 Deep Vision vs. deep neural networks 

Deep Vision is the technology behind ARGO LABORATORY’s entry to Chollet’s ARC-AGI challenge [19]. It represents a fundamentally different paradigm from deep learning. 

# 8 Conclusion and Future Work 

We have demonstrated that cross-area tactic transfer in formal mathematics is possible, with a 40% success rate on the first tested pair. The key enabling insight is the (head, modifier) decomposition: tactic heads are domain-gated, but modifiers carry domain-general proof patterns that transfer across distant areas. Future directions include: 1. Schema parser refinement. Decompose schemas into explicit (head, modifier) tuples and rank transferability by modifier independently. 2. More pairs. The worklist contains 9 additional (source, target) pairs including NumberTheory 

→ Dynamics and Probability → SetTheory; different area combinations may yield different transfer rates. 3. Novel proofs. The current results are alternative proofs of existing theorems. Applying the method to unproved conjectures (identified in the Speculations.md files) would test whether cross-area transfer can produce genuinely new mathematical knowledge. 4. Bidirectional transfer. Running RepresentationTheory → Probability to test whether the transfer is symmetric. 14 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

Deep Vision Deep Neural Networks Explain-ability 

Full step-by-step trace: which rela-tions matched, which entities corre-sponded, why a particular analogy was chosen. Can explain to any judge why a decision was made—and what to change to get a different outcome. Black box. Gradient-based attri-bution methods (SHAP, LIME) are post-hoc approximations, not the ac-tual reasoning path. 

Efficiency <$0.01 per ARC-AGI task suite (100s of tasks). Runs in a browser, in JavaScript, on a CPU, on a phone, in airplane mode. The NP-hard match-ing runs on commodity hardware— a MacBook Air’s GPU discovered these 4 new proofs. 

$2+ per task suite (frontier models). Requires data-center GPUs, high-bandwidth interconnects, megawatts of power. 

Repre-sentation 

Emergent and distributed. The sys-tem crafts its representation as it studies each problem—entities, rela-tions, and correspondences emerge from the structure of the specific sit-uation. Fixed. Representations are learned once during training and frozen at in-ference. The network cannot restruc-ture its representation for a novel problem. 

Paradigm Relational analogy as cognition. In-telligence is perceiving shared rela-tional structure across superficially different situations [2]. Domain-independent: the same matching en-gine handles chess, theorem proving, and ARC-AGI tasks. Statistical pattern completion. Intel-ligence is next-token prediction over massive corpora. Domain generality comes from scale, not from architec-tural principles. 

Access-ibility 

Fluid general intelligence in your pocket, regardless of who you are, where you live, or what you can af-ford. Runs offline, on-device, no API keys, no subscriptions, no data leav-ing the device. Controlled by a handful of data-center owners. Requires internet, API access, and per-token payment. Concentrates capability in the hands of those who can afford the infras-tructure. 

Table 3: Deep Vision vs. deep neural networks on five axes. 

# Acknowledgments 

Named after Horacio Hideki Yanasse. The Deep Vision matching engine was originally developed for chess cognition research; its application to formal mathematics was enabled by the domain-independent design of deep vision lib.py . All computations were performed on a MacBook Air (Apple M-series, 32 GB unified memory) using PyTorch 2.8 on the MPS backend. 

# References 

[1] A. Linhares, “Deep Vision,” ARGO LABS Internal Report, 2026. [2] D. R. Hofstadter and the Fluid Analogies Research Group, Fluid Concepts & Creative Analogies: Computer Models of the Fundamental Mechanisms of Thought . New York: Basic Books, 1995. 15 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

[3] D. R. Hofstadter, G¨ odel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid , 20th anniversary ed. New York: Basic Books, 1999. [4] D. R. Hofstadter and E. Sander, Surfaces and Essences: Analogy as the Fuel and Fire of Thinking . New York: Basic Books, 2013. [5] D. Hofstadter, “The Copycat Project,” MIT AI Lab, Tech. Rep., 1984. [6] M. Mitchell and D. R. Hofstadter, “The emergence of understanding in a computer model of concepts and analogy-making,” Physica D , vol. 42, no. 1–3, pp. 322–334, 1990. [7] D. J. Chalmers, R. M. French, and D. R. Hofstadter, “High-level perception, representation, and analogy: A critique of artificial intelligence methodology,” J. Experimental & Theoretical AI , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 185–211, 1992. [8] R. M. French and D. Hofstadter, “Tabletop: An emergent, stochastic model of analogy-making,” in Proc. 13th Annual Cognitive Science Society Conference , 1991. [9] H. E. Foundalis, “PHAEACO: A cognitive architecture inspired by Bongard’s problems,” Ph.D. thesis, Indiana University, 2006. [10] J. Rehling, “Letter Spirit (Part Two): Modeling creativity in a visual domain,” Ph.D. thesis, Indiana University, 2001. [11] E. P. Nichols, “MUSICAT: A computer model of musical listening and analogy-making,” Ph.D. thesis, Indiana University, 2012. [12] A. Linhares, “An active symbols theory of chess intuition,” Minds and Machines , vol. 15, pp. 131–151, 2005. [13] A. Linhares and P. Brum, “Understanding our understanding of strategic scenarios: What role do chunks play?” Cognitive Science , vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 989–1007, 2007. [14] A. Linhares and A. E. T. A. Freitas, “Questioning Chase and Simon’s (1973) ‘Perception in Chess’,” New Ideas in Psychology , vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 64–78, 2010. [15] A. Linhares, A. E. T. A. Freitas, A. Mendes, and J. S. Silva, “Entanglement of perception and reasoning in the combinatorial game of chess,” Cognitive Systems Research , vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 72–86, 2012. [16] A. Linhares and D. M. Chada, “What is the nature of the mind’s pattern-recognition process?” 

New Ideas in Psychology , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 108–121, 2013. [17] A. Linhares, “The emergence of choice: Decision-making and strategic thinking through analogies,” Information Sciences , vol. 259, pp. 36–56, 2014. [18] A. Linhares, “Deep Vision: Seeing the essence of proofs through analogy,” ARGO LABS Internal Report, 2026. [19] F. Chollet, “On the measure of intelligence,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547 , 2019. [20] P. Song, K. Yang, and A. Anandkumar, “Lean Copilot: Large language models as copilots for theorem proving in Lean,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12534 , 2024. 16 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

[21] AlphaProof Team (Google DeepMind), “AlphaProof: AI system for formal mathematical reasoning at the IMO level,” 2025. [22] The Harmonic Team, “Aristotle: IMO-level automated theorem proving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01346 , 2025. [23] S. Eilenberg and S. Mac Lane, “Cohomology theory in abstract groups. II: Group extensions with a non-Abelian kernel,” Ann. of Math. , vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 326–341, 1947. [24] H. Cartan and S. Eilenberg, Homological Algebra . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1956. [25] K. S. Brown, Cohomology of Groups , Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 87. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1982. [26] C. A. Weibel, An Introduction to Homological Algebra , Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 38. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994. [27] A. Livingston, “Group cohomology in the Lean community library,” in Proc. 14th International Conference on Interactive Theorem Proving (ITP 2023) , LIPIcs, vol. 268, pp. 22:1–22:17, 2023. [28] B. Conrad, “The bar resolution,” Stanford Math 210B lecture notes. http://math.stanford. edu/~conrad/210BPage/handouts/dexact.pdf .[29] R. Sharifi, “Group and Galois cohomology,” UCLA lecture notes. https://www.math.ucla. edu/~sharifi/groupcoh.pdf .[30] R. J. Shank and D. L. Wehlau, “On the coinvariants of modular representations of cyclic groups of prime order,” J. Pure and Appl. Algebra , vol. 207, no. 3, pp. 623–635, 2006. [31] J.-P. Serre, Linear Representations of Finite Groups , Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 42. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1977. [32] C. W. Curtis and I. Reiner, Representation Theory of Finite Groups and Associative Algebras .New York: Interscience/Wiley, 1962. [33] P. Webb, A Course in Finite Group Representation Theory , Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 161. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016. [34] E. Noether, “Hyperkomplexe Gr¨ oßen und Darstellungstheorie,” Math. Zeitschrift , vol. 30, pp. 641–692, 1929. [35] A. Linhares, “Deep Vision: A formal proof of Wolstenholme’s theorem in Lean 4,” ARGO LABS Report for Distribution, 2026. [36] A. Linhares, “A sketch of Deep Vision’s study of mathematics,” ARGO LABS Report for Distribution, 2026. 17 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

# A Lean Code: New Proofs 

A.1 Item 0: εToSingle 0 comp eq via ext1 + simp 

import Mathlib open Rep . standardComplex CategoryTheory variable ( k G : Type *) [ CommRing k ] [ Monoid G ] set_option backward . isDefEq . respectTransparency false in theorem epsToSingle0_comp_eq_reproof :(( forget2 _ ( ModuleCat k ) ) . mapHomologicalComplex _ ) . map ( epsToSingle0 k G ) >> ( HomologicalComplex . singleMapHomologicalComplex _ _ _ ) . hom . app _ =( forget2ToModuleCatHomotopyEquiv k G ) . hom := by dsimp refine HomologicalComplex . Hom . ext ? _ funext nobtain _ | n := nany_goals rfl simpa using ( for get 2To Modu leC atH omo top yEqu iv_ f_0 _eq k G ) . symm 

18 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

A.2 Item 1: Coinvariants.le comap ker via span le.2 + rintro 

import Mathlib open Representation Coinvariants Submodule namespace YanasseReproof variable { k G V : Type *} [ CommRing k ] [ Group G ] [ AddCommGroup V ] [ Module k V ] variable ( rho : Representation k G V ) ( S : Subgroup G ) [ S . Normal ] lemma le_comap_ker_adapted ( g : G ) :Coinvariants . ker ( rho . comp S . subtype ) <= ( Coinvariants . ker ( rho . comp S . subtype ) ) . comap ( rho g ) := by refine Submodule . span_le .2 ? _ rintro _ < <| > <s , x > , rfl > simpa using mem_ker_of_eq <g * s * g ^{ -1} , Subgroup . Normal . conj_mem ... s .1 s .2 g > ( rho g x ) _ ( by simp ) end YanasseReproof 

19 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

A.3 Item 6: εToSingle 0 comp eq via any goals rfl 

import Mathlib . RepresentationTheory . Homological . Resolution universe uopen Rep . standardComplex CategoryTheory variable ( k G : Type u ) [ CommRing k ] [ Monoid G ] set_option backward . isDefEq . respectTransparency false in theorem epsToSingle0_comp_eq_reproof_v2 :(( forget2 _ ( ModuleCat .{ u } k ) ) . mapHomologicalComplex _ ) . map ( epsToSingle0 k G ) >> ( HomologicalComplex . singleMapHomologicalComplex _ _ _ ) . hom . app _ =( forget2ToModuleCatHomotopyEquiv k G ) . hom := by dsimp refine HomologicalComplex . Hom . ext ? _ funext nobtain _ | n := nany_goals rfl simpa using ( for get 2To Modu leC atH omo top yEqu iv_ f_0 _eq k G ) . symm 

20 Citation: Linhares, A. “Yanasse: Finding New Proofs from Deep Vision’s Analogies — Part 1,” Argolab.org Report for Dissemination, 2026. 

A.4 Item 8: equivalenceModuleMonoidAlgebra naturality via by cases 

Two proofs were produced. The first closes without by cases (the naturality holds uniformly): 

import Mathlib . RepresentationTheory . Rep . Iso open CategoryTheory variable { k : Type *} { G : Type *} [ CommRing k ] [ Monoid G ] namespace Rep set_option backward . isDefEq . respectTransparency false in example : forall { X Y : Rep k G } ( f : X --> Y ) , ( Id ( Rep k G ) ) . map f >> ( unitIso Y ) . hom =( unitIso X ) . hom >> ( toModuleMonoidAlgebra | > ofModuleMonoidAlgebra ) . map f:= by intro X Y fext xsimp [ unitIso , unitIsoAddEquiv , toModuleMonoidAlgebra , ofModuleMonoidAlgebra , toModuleMonoidAlgebraMap ] rfl end Rep 

The second uses the by cases pattern transferred from probability (case-split on f = 0 ): 

intro X Y fby_cases hf : f = 0. -- Case f = 0: trivial subst hf ; simp . -- Case f != 0: full calculation ext xsimp [ unitIso , unitIsoAddEquiv , toModuleMonoidAlgebra , ofModuleMonoidAlgebra , toModuleMonoidAlgebraMap ] rfl 

Both compile with lake env lean returning exit code 0. The by cases version is instructive: the case split is mathematically unnecessary (both branches close the same way), but the semantic adaptation faithfully tests whether “split on a structural property of the input” translates from probability’s “split on index emptiness” to representation theory’s “split on morphism triviality.” It does—the pattern is domain-general. 21