Title: Dicovering the emergent nonlinear dynamics of acoustically levitated cube clusters

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.15894v1

Published Time: Wed, 18 Mar 2026 00:23:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Discovering the emergent nonlinear dynamics of acoustically levitated cube clusters 

Annie Z. Xia, 1 Melody X. Lim, 1, 2, ∗ Jason Z. Kim, 3, ∗ Bryan VanSaders, 2, † and Heinrich M. Jaeger 1, 2 

> 1

Department of Physics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA 

> 2

James Franck Institute, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA 

> 3

Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA 

The complex behavior of many natural and engineered systems emerges from the interaction of a small number of effective degrees of freedom. Discovering the physical basis of the interactions between these degrees of freedom directly from experimental observations has been a longstanding challenge, particularly with respect to predicting the long-time dynamics of dynamical systems with unknown equations of motion. Here, we introduce a data-driven approach that is able to produce a generative model for the long-time dynamical behavior of systems with a weakly attracting manifold. We apply this method to an experimental dynamical system with two degrees of freedom: acoustically levitated pairs of cube-shaped particles, which cluster by sharing a single edge. In the acoustic trap, the center-of-mass of the cube cluster oscillates vertically about the levitation plane, while also oscillating about their flexible hinge-like connection. Depending on their initial condition, the hinge dynamics evolve about three distinct nonlinear dynamical attractors persisting for hundreds of cycles. In order to capture the underlying physics, we develop a numerical fitting procedure and extract a minimal nonlinear dynamical model that captures both the long-time dynamics of the cluster as well as the convergence onto the dynamical steady state. This dynamical model uncovers the nonlinear, non-reciprocal coupling between the center-of-mass motion and the hinge degree of freedom that stabilizes the dynamical attractors, which we subsequently confirm by independent finite-element methods. Our results demonstrate a novel data-driven method for the discovery of nonlinear models with long-timescale stable predictions. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Complex dynamics frequently emerges from nonlinear coupling between a small number of effective degrees of freedom in a wide variety of systems, including gene reg-ulatory networks [1–3], oscillating chemical reactions [4], ecological community dynamics [5], and neuronal dynam-ics [6–9]. In order to discover the governing equations un-derlying these dynamical systems, data is often modeled as a set of differential equations, with nonlinear coupling estimated by hand from physical first principles. Recent work in system identification and dynamical modeling has aimed to automatize these efforts by directly fitting nonlinear interaction terms to time-series data measured from complex systems [10–21]. A complementary set of neural-network-based tools have instead focused on ac-curate time-series prediction and generation without ne-cessitating a set of pre-defined physical interactions [22– 27]. Both approaches have typically focused on predict-ing the short-time behavior of the system, i.e. accurate reconstructions of the local velocity and acceleration, or require strict conditions about the governing physics and functional form of the nonlinearities [9, 28–30]. However, dynamical systems which evolve about weakly attracting manifolds typically exhibit a large separation of scales between the short- and long-timescale behavior of the system. Such systems present a longstanding challenge           

> ∗Current address: Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA
> †Current address: Department of Physics, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

to identifying interpretable and generative models, par-ticularly in the presence of noise [31, 32]. Here, we present a novel data-driven approach (illus-trated schematically in Fig. 1) to discover the govern-ing equations underlying a dynamical system with two degrees of freedom. We begin this paper with a discus-sion of our data-driven approach for discovering govern-ing dynamical equations in oscillatory systems with large separation in scales between short and long-time behav-iors. We apply this method to an experimental system with two degrees of freedom: a pair of cube shaped par-ticles levitated in an acoustic trap. Oscillations in the cluster bending angle couple nonlinearly to the center-of-mass motion of the cluster. We demonstrate that this nonlinearity manifests in the form of long-lived dynami-cal attractors in state space, and that convergence onto these dynamical attractors is robust for a wide range of initial conditions. In search of the physical basis of this nonlinearity, we develop a numerical fitting proce-dure that explicitly accounts for the long-term structure and stability of the attractor (schematically illustrated in Fig. 1). In order to produce robust estimates of the fitting parameters, we combine results from many different ex-perimental datasets, retaining only the parameters that are statistically significant across all experiments. Using this fitting procedure, we develop a minimal model for the cluster dynamics that reveals a nonreciprocal nonlin-ear coupling between the cluster bending angle and the center-of-mass motion. Finite-element simulations con-firm the same nonlinearity. Our results pave a way for-ward for robust parameter estimation and forecasting of weakly nonlinear, noisy physical systems. In order to accurately fit a dynamical model that pro-

> arXiv:2603.15894v1 [nlin.CD] 16 Mar 2026

2        

> FIG. 1. Schematic of the fitting procedure. We show sample data collected from an experimental system consisting of time-series data with two degrees of freedom xand y.The instantaneous acceleration of the system is then reconstructed from linear and nonlinear combinations of the system variables by linear regression, resulting in an initial model C0which fits instantaneous accelerations well but fails to capture long-time dynamical behavior. The dynamical equation is then refined by integrating the fitted dynamics forward, and modifying the coefficients to reconstruct long-time features of the original data. Finally, the coefficients are aggregated from repeat experiments, and only the most consistent terms are included in the final fit.

duces stable long-timescale predictions, we develop a new approach where the attractor shape, stability, and con-vergence properties are directly incorporated into the cost function of the fitting procedure, shown schemati-cally in Fig. 1. We apply this method on experimental observations of a dynamical system with two degrees of freedom which we call x and y.For the first step of our fitting procedure, we use ex-isting methods for data-driven regression of the underly-ing dynamical equations [14] to obtain reasonable initial coefficients that reconstruct the short-time experimental data. We assume dynamics containing polynomial terms up to third order in the state space [ x, y, ˙x, ˙y], and find the coefficients C0 which best reconstruct the instanta-neous accelerations [¨ x, ¨y]. This fitting method is able to approximate the instantaneous accelerations reason-ably well. However, integrating the dynamics forward in time produces attractor structures that do not match those observed in the experiment (red traces in step 3 of Fig. 1). In order to improve the predicted dynamics, we optimize the initial coefficients to match longer-time features in the data, including the steady state attrac-tor shape, transient convergence trajectory, and the and the average oscillation timescale (step 2 in Fig. 1). We find that performing this optimization results in higher fi-delity long-term reconstruction of the experimentally ob-served attractor manifolds. In order to find statistically significant nonlinearities, we then repeat this procedure for many experimental datasets, and compare the op-timized coefficients. Identifying significant terms across the data ensemble, then re-optimizing with only the most significant coefficients leads to a minimal model, which is able to capture the observed long-term dynamical be-havior with only a few key nonlinearities.  

> II. METHODS

We demonstrate the utility of our method by apply-ing it to a model experimental system, consisting of a pair of sub-millimeter particles levitated in an acoustic trap. We establish an acoustic standing wave in air with a single node between a transducer and planar reflecting surface spaced one-half wavelength apart (Fig. 2a, sound wavelength λs = 7 .5 mm). Computer control over the transducer allows for temporal modulation of the energy supplied to the acoustic cavity. Single particles levitate in the nodal plane, at a vertical position where the weight of the particle is balanced by the acoustic trapping force (which we define as y = 0). When a second particle is introduced to the acoustic trap, acoustic scattering due to the presence of the other particle generates attrac-tive forces that cluster particles [33–35]. These attractive forces depend strongly on particle shape: pairs of rigid cubes (here grains of table salt with density 2160 kg m −3

and side lengths s between 400 to 700 μm) cluster acous-3                    

> FIG. 2. An acoustically levitated cube dimer is a gran-ular hinge with an emergent elastic degree of freedom arising from particle geometry. (a) Diagram of ex-perimental setup. The transducer emits ultrasound in air at
> f0= 45 .650 kHz and wavelength λ≈7.5 mm. The reflec-tor is placed at a resonant distance to generate a pressure standing wave with a single node. We apply a square wave modulation to turn off the field for some time toff , injecting energy into the system. (b) Image of cube cluster dynamics over time, with subsequent images having a time difference of ∆ t= 4 ms. The levitation plane defines y= 0 (see Sup-plementary Information for details of the measurement), and we define θas difference of the upper contact angle αand the lower contact angle βdivided by π. (c) Restoring vertical force about the levitation plane due to the primary acoustic force. Experimental data (orange) is compared to the results of a Lattice-Boltzmann method (LBM) simulation (black) (d) Restoring torque about the contact point of the cluster. Ex-perimental results (blue) are compared to the results of a LBM simulation (black).

tically by forming an edge-edge contact [36]. The acous-tic scattering force furthermore establishes an effective elasticity between the cubes in the cluster. In the under-damped environment of the acoustic trap, this elasticity results in oscillatory bending motion about the point of contact. We define θ = α−βπ to be the normalized differ-ence between the top angle α and the bottom angle β.

θ takes values between ±1, which correspond to a cube dimer contacting face-to-face. This angle will oscillate around θ = 0, corresponding to a corner-to-corner con-tact where the top angle and bottom angle are both π/ 4. At the same time, due to restoring forces from the acous-tic trap, the cluster undergoes center-of-mass oscillations about its equilibrium levitation height (Fig. 2b). We characterize the elasticity of each of these degrees of freedom by measuring the displacement of the cube cluster from its equilibrium position. We estimate the restoring elastic force on the vertical center-of-mass y

of the cube cluster by measuring the vertical accelera-tion ¨ y. Plotting ¨ y as a function of y reveals that for vertical displacements smaller than the side length of a cube y < s , the restoring force is approximately linear in y, giving rise to simple harmonic motion about the levitation plane. These observations are in good quali-tative agreement with the results of Lattice-Boltzmann Method (LBM) simulations (Fig. 2c). Similarly, plot-ting the bending angle acceleration ¨θ as a function of the bending angle θ reveals a linear restoring torque for small bending angles, again in good agreement with the results of LBM simulations (Fig. 2d). In order to access dynamics beyond the linear regime, we briefly turn off the acoustic field, allowing the center-of-mass of the cube cluster to accelerate downwards un-der the effect of gravity (series of still images shown in Fig. 3a, Supplemental Movie 1). Since the removal of the acoustic field also removes the restoring torque keep-ing θ = 0, the cubes are also free to pivot about their shared edge. Once the acoustic field is turned back on, the cube cluster experiences forces and internal torques according to its new configuration, which are now far from the mechanical equilibrium conditions at ( y, θ ) = 0. As a result, this brief field modulation drives large am-plitude oscillations in both y and θ.To quantify these observations, we plot the resulting oscillations in y and θ as a function of time before and af-ter the modulation (Fig. 3b), together with their discrete Fourier transform. We find that after field modulation, the center-of-mass oscillations appear sinusoidal, with a single frequency component, consistent with the expec-tation that the cluster behaves as a simple harmonic os-cillator with linear restoring force (Fig. 2c). In contrast, oscillations in the bending angle consist of two separate frequency components. Plotting the two frequency com-ponents as functions of the y-frequency over many exper-iments (Fig. 3c) reveals that the slow frequency compo-nent is locked to the y-frequency, while the fast frequency is double the y-frequency. Furthermore, this frequency doubling is accompanied by phase-locking between the y-oscillations and the slow θ frequency oscillations. Plot-ting the probability density function of the phase differ-ences between oscillations in y and θ reveals that the distribution of phase differences is bimodal, with peaks where y and θ are either exactly in phase or antiphase (Fig. 3d). This frequency and phase locking suggests the existence of a nonlinear coupling between cluster shape and its vertical displacement in the acoustic trap. 4                      

> FIG. 3. External modulation controllably excites both oscillatory hinge modes. (a) Image sequence showing field modulation. Prior to modulation ( t < 0), the cluster is stably levitated in the acoustic field. At t= 0 the field is turned off and the cubes fall under gravity. At t= 13ms, the field is turned on again and the clusters experience restoring forces, giving rise to oscillations in both degrees of freedom. (b) (Left) Smoothed traces of yand θbetween the cubes before, during, and after the modulation. (Right) Discrete Fourier transform of the yand θsignals. (c) Ratio between ωyand the two slow and fast angle components, plotted in light green and dark green respectively. (d) Plot of the probability density function of the phase difference between the yand θoscillations (examples for phase difference of 0 and 1 plotted in insets).
> III. RESULTS

To further characterize this nonlinear coupling, we turn to the dynamical phase-space of the cube cluster. Since the system dynamics are underdamped, the dy-namic trajectory of a cube dimer is characterized by 4 state variables: {y, ˙y, θ, ˙θ}. As y is close to harmonic, we choose to visualize on the 3-dimensional axes {θ, ˙θ, y }.Plotting our data on these axes reveals the existence of three distinct attracting trajectories in phase space (ex-amples plotted as blue, red, and green traces in Fig. 4a, see Supplementary Movies 2-4 for dynamics). These tra-jectories persist for over one hundred cycles in θ without changing in amplitude. Qualitatively, the key differences between the three trajectories are in the amplitude of the blue class compared to the red and green class, while the red and green trajectories differ in the relative phase between y and θ oscillations (appearing as a relative ro-tation in the three-dimensional state space, and corre-sponding to the two classes observed in Fig. 3d). In order to confirm the general dynamical stability of these attractors across the experimental dataset, we define a Poincar´ e section to further reduce the data di-mensionality. This Poincar´ e section, and accompanying Poincar´ e map allow us to quantify whether the attrac-tor location is generally fixed across the observed experi-mental data, and additionally allows for quantification of the convergence of off-manifold points onto the attractor manifold. We define the Poincar´ e section as the hyper-plane y = 0, and the corresponding Poincar´ e map such that the i-th point of the Poincar´ e map ( θi, ˙θi) is the i-the crossing of y = 0 from above as the system evolves in time (example shown in Fig. 4b). We find that the Poincar´ e map consists of two distinct parts: first, evolu-tion from the initial condition along some transient tra-jectory, and second, a steady state fixed point where the map returns to the same location in the Poincar´ e section for the rest of the observed cycles. Aggregating experi-mental data reveals that both the transient convergence trajectory (Fig. 4d) and the fixed point location (Fig. 4e) are consistent across multiple observations. Furthermore, each of the three attractors (classified by phase difference and amplitude, steady-state time-series shown in Fig. 4c) is distinguished by a distinct convergence path, together with its unique steady state parameterized by ( θi, ˙θi). In a system with only two degrees of freedom and four state variables, the coexistence of these three attractors points to the existence of an emergent nonlinearity that couples the cluster shape and its vertical position in the acoustic trap. Our experimental observations, consisting in changes over time of two variables, are naturally represented by a pair of differential equations, with an unknown non-linear coupling between the two variables θ and y. In order to discover the governing equations, and particu-larly the form of the nonlinearity that is responsible for the observed attractor structure, we turn to data-driven system identification methods. Previous work on system 5                

> FIG. 4. Phase locking in oscillations leads to three distinct dynamic memories persisting over hundreds of cycles (a) Sample trajectories for three distinct attractor types (100 cycles of each), projected onto the θ, ˙θ,yaxes. The y= 0 hyperplane is shown in purple. (b) Example of the Poincar´ e section, together with resulting Poincar´ e map. We define the Poincar´ e section as the y= 0 hyperplane (purple), and take the Poincar´ e map to be the point in each cycle where the data first crosses the section in the ˙y < 0 direction (from above in this projection). Purple box: resulting Poincar´ e map for 60 cycles of data (color corresponding to time after drop for the first 30 cycles. Cycles 30-60 are plotted in light blue). (c) Sample trajectories of θ(t) (dark) and y(t) (light) for the three classes shown in (a). (d) Sample flows on the Poincar´ e maps for the first 10 (20) points in each trajectory, separated by attractor class. 10 trajectories from each class are included. A Savitzky-Golay filter of order 2 and window length 5 is applied to the Poincar´ e map to smooth the flows. (e) Aggregated Poincar´ e maps for the last 60 points in each trajectory, colored by attractor class. 10 trajectories from each class are included.

identification methods is generally focused on accurate short-term trajectory prediction, i.e. instantaneous ac-celerations and velocities. Our data presents a unique challenge in that the nonlinearity stabilizes relatively long-timescale structures. In order to accurately fit a dynamical equation that produces stable long-timescale predictions, we apply the new approach described previ-ously, where the attractor shape, stability, and conver-gence properties are directly incorporated into the cost function of the fitting procedure. For the first step of our model fitting procedure, we use existing methods for data-driven regression of the underlying dynamical equations [14] to obtain reasonable initial coefficients that reconstruct the short-time exper-imental data. Specifically, for a single trial, we construct an array X containing time-series of our four state vari-ables: X = [ y, ˙y, θ, ˙θ]. Our objective is to reconstruct the observed accelerations ¨X = [¨ y, ¨θ] by linear and non-linear combinations of the four state variables. In order to do this without making any assumptions about the form of the nonlinearity, we create a nonlinear library of polynomial functions up to third order, which we call 

ΛX . There are thirty five third order terms (for example, 

y, θ 3, ˙θy 2, etc.). In order to avoid spurious terms in this dynamical fitting, we choose the equilibrium levitation height y0 in the rest frame of the cluster (See Appendix D for further discussion on y0). The task of finding the governing equation that best explains the instantaneous (short-term) dynamics can thus be framed as solving the linear regression problem ¨X = ΛX C, where C is the matrix of coefficients that determines the contribution of each term in ΛX to the instantaneous acceleration. Although this fitting method is able to reasonably ap-proximate the instantaneous acceleration given the cur-rent state of the dynamical system, initial conditions integrated forward with these dynamics deviate signifi-6                       

> FIG. 5. Discovering the governing nonlinearity via model fitting. (a) Schematic of our parameter fitting procedure. We first find the best linearly fitting coefficients C0which minimizes the error ¨X−ΛXC0between experimental acceleration
> ¨Xand polynomial combinations of our state variables ΛX. These coefficients C0are then used as initial conditions for gradient descent over the loss function Lwhich has three terms, each penalizing different deviations of simulated, integrated dynamics from the data time-series. (b) Example optimization trajectory starting from initial C0and reaching final C. (c) Z-scores for second order fits of ¨ yand ¨θafter optimization over 10 large attractor (class 1) trajectories. Discarding terms with a z-score lower than 3, and including physical terms for viscous damping, we attain two nonlinear equations for ¨ yand ¨θ. (d) Normalized coefficient distributions for the eleven significant terms used in the reduced model.

cantly from experimental trajectories (example shown in Fig. 5b, see Appendix C for further characterization). As a result, the initial linear regression method produces co-efficients that are unable to generate the same long-time dynamics as observed in the experiment. To refine the dynamics and correctly capture the at-tractor structure observed in experiments, the second step of our fitting procedure performs gradient-free op-timization on the coefficients obtained via linear regres-sion. This optimization explicitly acts to minimize a loss function L that contains information about the long-term structure and stability of the experimental data. In order to do so, we construct L as the sum of three terms which respectively penalize deviations from the shape of the ex-perimentally measured steady-state dynamical attractor, the convergence properties (as measured on the Poincar´ emap), and oscillation frequency (schematically depicted in Fig. 5a). Performing an optimization to minimize L

by changing C produces long-time dynamics that match the attractor structure in the experiments more closely than those obtained via linear regression (Fig. 5b, See Appendix C for details about model optimization). In order to make this model estimation procedure ro-bust against noise in the experimental system and cor-rectly generalize across multiple datasets, we eliminate terms with low statistical significance from the regres-sion. Specifically, we examine the distribution of coeffi-cient values across repeated experimental trials for the large amplitude attractor (class 1), and plot the z-score (mean divided by standard deviation) for the values of C

in Fig. 5(c) for both ¨ y and ¨θ. In doing so, we find that the vast majority of the third-order terms have small z-scores, suggesting that the data can be well explained by a sparse subset of the terms. We identify these statisti-cally significant terms by applying a cutoff of z = 3, and adding viscous damping terms, to obtain two simplified dynamical equations: ¨y = a0 + a1y + a2y2 + a3 ˙y (1) ¨θ = b0 + b1θ + b2y + b3θy 2 + b4 ˙θ + b5 ˙θ2y + b6 ˙θ ˙yy . (2) Plotting the distribution of a0 to a3, and b0 to b6 across experimental trials (Fig. 5d) reveals roughly Gaussian distributions of the coefficients, with non-zero mean. Our 7                                   

> FIG. 6. Simple nonlinear model captures shape and convergence of dynamical memories (a) Sample attractor trajectory with (blue) and without (pink) cross coupling term b4θy . Green lines represent δh i, the minimum distance between a particular simulated point and the data trajectory. State variables are all normalized according to x∗=x
> max( |x|).The pointwise squared error δh 2
> iaveraged over all points gives δh 2
> i.(b) Sample Poincar´ e section with (blue) and without (pink) cross coupling term b4θy .Green lines represent δp i, the normalized distance between the simulation and data. The state variables are normalized according to x∗=x
> max( |x|)(c) Distribution of δh 2
> ifor 55 datasets. The stars show values of δh 2
> ifrom the sample trajectories in (a) and (b). Reported p-values are from a signed rank test with null hypothesis H0:μf−μo= 0. (d) Distribution of δp 2
> ifor 55 datasets.

results show that the observed nonlinearities of the ex-perimental data are well explained by a sparse set of three nonlinear terms that couple the bending angle of the cube cluster to its center-of-mass position (with coefficients b4,

b5 and b6). These nonlinear terms are robustly observed across multiple experimental trials, suggesting that the consistently observed nonlinear dynamics (Fig. 4) stem from a single coherent governing equation. Note that the constant terms a0 and b0 in the minimal model can be estimated from the other parameters and the choice of rest frame y0 and do not need to be optimized separately (See Appendix D for details) In order to independently validate the numerically dis-covered nonlinearity, we performed finite-element simu-lations (see Supplementary Information). Due to com-putational cost, these finite-element simulations are able to capture only static forces and torques (i.e. no non-linearities proportional to ˙y or ˙θ). Nevertheless, these lowest-order simulations also show a contribution to the restoring torque of the form ¨θ ∝ θy 2, corresponding to the term b4 above, and independently validating the nu-merically discovered nonlinearity to lowest order. We now examine whether this simplified governing equation, with the three nonlinear terms, is necessary and sufficient to capture the nonlinear dynamics observed in the experiment. We do so by integrating the simplified equation of motion forward from the initial conditions of the experiment, and observing the long-time behavior, as well as the convergence onto the attractor manifold. To assess the role of the nonlinear terms in the system dynamics, we perform the forward integration both for the equation of motion Eq. 2, as well as a version where we omit the nonlinear cross terms (i.e. set b4, b 5, b 6 = 0 and redo the optimization). Plotting the phase-space trajectory of the sample forward-simulated data reveals that the full equation of motion closely conforms to the experimentally observed attractor structure (blue simulated data vs gray data points in Fig. 6a), while omitting the nonlinear term causes deviations from the shape of the observed attrac-tor structure (pink simulated data vs gray data points in Fig. 6a). Examining the Poincar´ e map for the first few iterations reveals that convergence onto the attrac-tor manifold also takes a significantly different trajectory for the case without nonlinearity (Fig. 6b). Quantitatively, we evaluate the discrepancy between the forward-simulated equations of motion and the ex-perimental results using the shape distance δh i and the distance between the Poincar´ e maps δp i (see Ap-pendix C for further details, green arrows in Fig. 6a,b for schematic representation). Evaluating the average shape error ¯(δh )2 and average convergence error ¯(δp )2 re-veals that the full equations of motion have small shape error and convergence error (blue data in Fig. 6c,d). In contrast, omitting the nonlinear coupling significantly in-creases both the shape and convergence error (pink data in Fig. 6c,d). For both the shape error and Poincar´ econvergence error, a signed rank test comparing the er-ror distributions of the full dynamics and a dynamics with no cross term has a p-value less than 10 −5. Our re-8sults signify that emergent nonlinearity in the form of the 

θy 2 cross term is essential in correctly capturing the co-existence, shape, and convergence of the attractor struc-ture seen in experiment. 

IV. DISCUSSION 

We have shown that emergent acoustic-shape interac-tions give rise to rich dynamical behaviors. Here, in an acoustically levitated system with only one shape degree of freedom, an emergent nonlinear restoring torque sta-bilizes three distinct attracting trajectories. The steady state oscillations of these attractor-like trajectories are long lived and can exhibit convergence times an order of magnitude larger than the typical timescales of the sys-tem. We are able to capture this long time behavior in a minimal dynamical model by minimizing a loss function which captures attractor convergence and steady state shape. Through this dynamical fitting and finite ele-ment simulations, we find a nonlinear cross-coupling term 

θy 2 which is necessary to recover the coexistence, conver-gence, and steady state structure of these attractors. We anticipate that our data-driven model-discovery procedure will be particularly useful for noisy experimen-tal data where the attracting manifolds are only weakly nonlinear. In these cases, applying existing sparse re-gression methods may not correctly identify the driving nonlinearities, as weakly nonlinear terms may only con-tribute relatively little to the local system accelerations. Furthermore, fitting procedures that rely exclusively on matching instantaneous derivatives may not be robust to sources of experimental noise that affect the time deriva-tives, for instance if there are small variations in the os-cillation period over time. Our method reduces reliance on these short-time variations and boosts the significance of weakly nonlinear terms by including the Poincar´ e map as a coarse-grained representation of the system (evalu-ated at every oscillation period T , rather than every time point t). Combining this approach with ensemble-based measures of statistical significance allows for accurate dy-namical fitting together with an interpretable minimal model. We envision applications and extensions of our method to a wide variety of other physical and biological dynamical systems to obtain interpretable and generative minimal models from noisy experimental data. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

A.Z.X. and B.VS. acknowledge support from the MR-SEC program of the NSF under DMR-2011854. M.X.L. and H.M.J. acknowledge support from NSF DMR-2104733. J.Z.K. was supported by postdoctoral fellow-ships from Bethe/KIC/Wilkins, Mong Neurotech, and the Eric and Wendy Schmidt AI in Science program of Schmidt Sciences, LLC. 

[1] J. E. Ferrell, T. Y.-C. Tsai, and Q. Yang, Modeling the cell cycle: why do certain circuits oscillate?, Cell 144 ,874 (2011). [2] D. Karig, K. M. Martini, T. Lu, N. A. DeLateur, N. Gold-enfeld, and R. Weiss, Stochastic Turing patterns in a syn-thetic bacterial population, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 , 6572 (2018). [3] A. R. Lederer, M. Leonardi, L. Talamanca, D. M. Bo-brovskiy, A. Herrera, C. Droin, I. Khven, H. J. Carvalho, A. Valente, A. Dominguez Mantes, et al. , Statistical in-ference with a manifold-constrained rna velocity model uncovers cell cycle speed modulations, Nature Methods , 1 (2024). [4] N. Tompkins, N. Li, C. Girabawe, M. Heymann, G. B. Er-mentrout, I. R. Epstein, and S. Fraden, Testing Turing’s theory of morphogenesis in chemical cells, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 , 4397 (2014). [5] J. Hu, D. R. Amor, M. Barbier, G. Bunin, and J. Gore, Emergent phases of ecological diversity and dynamics mapped in microcosms, Science 378 , 85 (2022). [6] J. J. Hopfield, Neurons with graded response have col-lective computational properties like those of two-state neurons., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-ences 81 , 3088 (1984). [7] L. F. Abbott and T. B. Kepler, Model neurons: from Hodgkin-Huxley to Hopfield, in Statistical Mechanics of Neural Networks: Proceedings of the Xlth Sitges Confer-ence Sitges, Barcelona, Spain, 3–7 June 1990 (Springer, 2005) pp. 5–18. [8] V. Crunelli and S. W. Hughes, The slow ( <1 Hz) rhythm of non-rem sleep: a dialogue between three cardinal os-cillators, Nature Neuroscience 13 , 9 (2010). [9] J. Colen, M. Han, R. Zhang, S. A. Redford, L. M. Lemma, L. Morgan, P. V. Ruijgrok, R. Adkins, Z. Bryant, Z. Dogic, M. L. Gardel, J. J. De Pablo, and V. Vitelli, Machine learning active-nematic hydrody-namics, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118 , e2016708118 (2021). [10] J. Bongard and H. Lipson, Automated reverse engineer-ing of nonlinear dynamical systems, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 , 9943 (2007). [11] M. Schmidt and H. Lipson, Distilling free-form natural laws from experimental data, Science 324 , 81 (2009). [12] W.-X. Wang, R. Yang, Y.-C. Lai, V. Kovanis, and C. Grebogi, Predicting catastrophes in nonlinear dynami-cal systems by compressive sensing, Physical Review Let-ters 106 , 154101 (2011). [13] B. C. Daniels and I. Nemenman, Automated adaptive inference of phenomenological dynamical models, Nature communications 6, 8133 (2015). [14] S. L. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, and J. N. Kutz, Discovering governing equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems, Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 113 , 3932 (2016). [15] S. H. Rudy, S. L. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, and J. N. Kutz, Data-driven discovery of partial differential equations, 9

Science Advances 3, e1602614 (2017). [16] H. Schaeffer, Learning partial differential equations via data discovery and sparse optimization, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engi-neering Sciences 473 , 20160446 (2017). [17] H. Schaeffer and S. G. McCalla, Sparse model selection via integral terms, Physical Review E 96 , 023302 (2017). [18] K. Kaheman, J. N. Kutz, and S. L. Brunton, SINDy-PI: a robust algorithm for parallel implicit sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics, Proceedings of the Royal Society A 476 , 20200279 (2020). [19] U. Fasel, J. N. Kutz, B. W. Brunton, and S. L. Brunton, Ensemble-SINDy: Robust sparse model discovery in the low-data, high-noise limit, with active learning and con-trol, Proceedings of the Royal Society A 478 , 20210904 (2022). [20] A. A. Kaptanoglu, B. M. de Silva, U. Fasel, K. Kaheman, A. J. Goldschmidt, J. L. Callaham, C. B. Delahunt, Z. G. Nicolaou, K. Champion, J.-C. Loiseau, et al. , Pysindy: A comprehensive python package for robust sparse system identification, arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08481 (2021). [21] J. Z. Kim, L.-W. Kong, and Z. Lu, Sigma-ds: System identification from the geometric manifold of dynamical synchronization, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 35 (2025). [22] R. T. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. K. Du-venaud, Neural ordinary differential equations, Advances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018). [23] J. Pathak, B. Hunt, M. Girvan, Z. Lu, and E. Ott, Model-free prediction of large spatiotemporally chaotic systems from data: A reservoir computing approach, Physical re-view letters 120 , 024102 (2018). [24] S. Cuomo, V. S. Di Cola, F. Giampaolo, G. Rozza, M. Raissi, and F. Piccialli, Scientific machine learning through physics–informed neural networks: Where we are and what’s next, Journal of Scientific Computing 92 ,88 (2022). [25] W. Yu, E. Abdelaleem, I. Nemenman, and J. C. Burton, Physics-tailored machine learning reveals unexpected physics in dusty plasmas, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 122 , e2505725122 (2025). [26] R. Yu and R. Wang, Learning dynamical systems from data: An introduction to physics-guided deep learning, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 121 , e2311808121 (2024). [27] A. Ghadami and B. I. Epureanu, Data-driven prediction in dynamical systems: Recent developments, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A. 380 , 20210213 (2022). [28] A. A. Kaptanoglu, J. L. Callaham, A. Aravkin, C. J. Hansen, and S. L. Brunton, Promoting global stability in data-driven models of quadratic nonlinear dynamics, Physical Review Fluids 6, 094401 (2021). [29] G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang, and L. Yang, Physics-informed machine learn-ing, Nat Rev Phys 3, 422 (2021). [30] T. Bertalan, F. Dietrich, I. Mezi´ c, and I. G. Kevrekidis, On learning Hamiltonian systems from data, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 29 , 121107 (2019). [31] B. Prokop and L. Gelens, From biological data to oscil-lator models using SINDy, iScience 27 (2024). [32] U. Fasel, J. N. Kutz, B. W. Brunton, and S. L. Brun-ton, Ensemble-SINDy: Robust sparse model discovery in the low-data, high-noise limit, with active learning and control, Proc. R. Soc. A. 478 , 20210904 (2022). [33] M. X. Lim, A. Souslov, V. Vitelli, and H. M. Jaeger, Clus-ter formation by acoustic forces and active fluctuations in levitated granular matter, Nat. Phys. 15 , 460 (2019). [34] M. X. Lim, B. VanSaders, A. Souslov, and H. M. Jaeger, Mechanical Properties of Acoustically Levitated Granu-lar Rafts, Phys. Rev. X 12 , 021017 (2022). [35] M. X. Lim, B. VanSaders, and H. M. Jaeger, Acoustic manipulation of multi-body structures and dynamics, Re-ports on Progress in Physics 87 , 064601 (2024). [36] M. X. Lim, K. A. Murphy, and H. M. Jaeger, Edges control clustering in levitated granular matter, Granular Matter 21 , 77 (2019).