Title: Liquid Tree Automata

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13456v1

Published Time: Thu, 14 May 2026 01:13:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 50

Markdown Content:
# Liquid Tree Automata 

Ashish Mishra 1 and Suresh Jagannathan 2 

> 1

IIT Hyderbad, India mishraashish@cse.iith.ac.in  

> 2

Purdue University, USA suresh@cs.purdue.edu 

Abstract. Component-based synthesis (CBS) aims to generate loop-free programs from a set of libraries whose methods are annotated with specifications and whose output must satisfy a set of logical constraints, expressed as a query. The effectiveness of a CBS algorithm critically depends on the severity of the constraints imposed by the query. The more exact these constraints are, the sparser the space of feasible solu-tions. This maxim also applies when we enrich the expressivity of the specifications affixed to library methods. In both cases, search must now contend with constraints that may only hold over a small number of the possible execution paths that can be enumerated by a CBS procedure. In this paper, we address this challenge by equipping CBS search with the ability to reason about logical similarities among the paths it ex-plores. Our setting considers library methods equipped with refinement-type specifications that enrich ordinary base types with a set of rich logical qualifiers to constrain the set of values accepted by that type. For efficient representation and enumeration of this space, we intro-duce a novel tree automata variant called Liquid Tree Automata (LTA) whose construction is driven by the typing rules of a refinement type sys-tem. This allows us to leverage subtyping constraints over the refinement types associated with enumerated terms to enable reasoning about sim-ilarity among candidate solutions as search proceeds, using this notion of similarity to eagerly merge LTA states. By doing so, we avoid explo-ration of semantically similar paths, leading to a significantly improved search procedure. We present an implementation of this idea in a tool called Hegel and provide a comprehensive evaluation that demonstrates 

Hegel ’s ability to synthesize solutions to complex CBS queries that go well-beyond the capabilities of the existing state-of-the-art. 

# 1 Introduction 

Component-based synthesis (CBS) aims to generate loop-free programs from a library of components, typically defined as methods provided by an API. At the heart of any CBS implementation is a search problem over a hypothesis space of programs that “glue” components together using basic control primitives, such as conditionals and function applications. If the attributes defining the behavior of components are not overly constrained, or when queries are reasonably general, the search for a feasible solution can be tractable. However, as specifications become more precise, the set of feasible programs becomes a small fraction of the                                                                                    

> arXiv:2605.13456v1 [cs.PL] 13 May 2026 2A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan
> (a) A part of the library (*take : (x : nat) →[a] →{v : [a] |len (v) ≤x∨len (v) = 0}*) val take : int →[a] →[a] (*splitAt : (x : nat) →(xs : [a]) →{v : (f : [a], s : [a])
> |len (f) ≤x∧(len (s) ≤len (xs) - x)}*) splitAt : int →[a] →([a],[a]) (*decr : (x : nat) →{v:int |x = x - 1}*) val decr : int →int (*fst : (x : ([a], [a])) →{v : [a] |v = fst (x)}*) val fst : ([a], [a]) →[a] (*snd : (x : ([a], [a])) →{v : [a] |v = snd (x)}*) val snd : ([a], [a]) →[a] (*drop : (x : nat) →(xs : [a]) →{v : [a] |len (v) ≤len (xs) - x}}*) val drop : int -> [a] →[a] (b) A functional query type (* goal : (x:nat) →(y : nat) →(z : [a]) →{ v : (f : [a], s : [a])
> |len (f) ≤x∧(len (s) ≤len (z) - y} *) goal : int →int →[a] →([a], [a]) (c) A few correct solutions. uncommented (black): unrefined, commented (green): refined. (* fun x y z →((take x (fst (splitAt y z))), snd (splitAt y z) ) *) fun x y z →splitAt y (drop x z) fun x y z →splitAt x (take y z)
> . . .

Fig. 1: Motivating Synthesis Problem overall search space, making synthesis significantly more challenging. Intuitively, we can define CBS search as a reachability analysis over a graph that relates candidate methods based on their type or other similar defining attributes. For example, a node in this graph associated with a method that has a particular result type can be connected to any node corresponding to a method that accepts an argument of this type. Such connections can be used by the synthesizer to produce a candidate solution that connect inputs to outputs through sequences of component applications. Prior work [10, 14, 21] has considered the construction of such graphs using simple type-based specifications. In this paper, we propose to allow richer query specifications in the form of refinement types [19] that both decorate library methods and serve as the basis for synthesis queries. Recent advances in automated theorem proving and formal verification have made it increasingly common to have libraries be equipped with such rich speci-fications [4, 30], motivating synthesis techniques that can effectively exploit and tame such information. While expressive specifications using refinement types Liquid Tree Automata 3

have been used previously to guide synthesis [25, 27], these approaches did not address the unique challenges that arise in a component-based synthesis setting, where naïve enumerative synthesis techniques are ineffective. The synthesis query in Fig. 1 illustrates this challenge. The synthesizer is given two inputs, the first is a library of components, each specified by a type signature enriched with refinement pre/postconditions, as comments. Fig. 1(a) shows a representative fragment of such a library; in practice, li-braries may contain hundreds of components spanning standard data structures and operations. The second input is a synthesis query (called goal ), also ex-pressed as a refinement type, specifying both the desired input–output base types and semantic constraints on the result (Fig. 1(b)). The synthesis task is to construct a composition of library components that satisfies the query’s refinement specification. Fig. 1(c) shows solutions for the simple (unrefined) goal in uncommented black, and for the refined query, commented in green. 

Fig. 2: An Ex-ample LTA A natural approach to handling such refined queries is to syn-thesize programs using only the unrefined base types of the query and library components [10, 14, 21] , and to subsequently apply a verification check to discard candidates that violate refinement constraints. Although simple, this strategy is un-likely to be effective at scale; not only is the solution space now very sparse, thus making simple path exploration inef-ficient, but the (base) type specifications of library methods are too weak to meaningfully guide the synthesizer toward a correct solution. To illustrate, we evaluated this synthesis problem (the commented goal, plus a mid-sized component library of around 300 functions) on two state-of-the-art systems that support such refined specifications. Synquid [27] performs refinement type-driven synthesis by enumerating well typed programs from the library, while Hoogle+ [17] encodes refinements using input-output examples, and does post-facto filtering. Both tools failed to synthe-size a solution for this query (e.g, the commented green definition in Fig. 1(c)) within a timeout of three minutes. The central challenge here is the ability to compactly represent the space of well typed programs and to search this space ef-ficiently. Existing component based synthesis techniques struggle on both fronts. In contrast, because our synthesis procedure, Hegel , constructs a compact rep-resentation of the well-typed search space to enable efficient exploration, it was able to synthesize the solution in 15 seconds. 

1.1 Solution: Liquid Tree Automata 

Several data structures could in principle be used to represent large spaces of can-didate programs, including Version Space Algebras [22], e-graphs [2] and Finite Tree Automata (FTA) [5]. In particular, FTA have been shown to be effective in representing the space of untyped programs, satisfying a set of input-output 4 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

examples [11], as well as simply-typed programs [5, 21]. However, these repre-sentations are insufficient for synthesis under refined library and query specifica-tions, where correctness depends on enforcing logical implication and semantic relationships between subterms. 3

Fig. 3: A simple LTA for binding (x : { ν : int |

10 ≥ ν ≥ 0 }) To address these limitations, we introduce a new data struc-ture, Liquid Tree Automata (LTA), that allows us to capture such logical constraints. An LTA supports a richer alphabet than other FTA variants by incorporating logical qualifiers from decidable first-order theory fragments. While it also al-lows constraints on its transitions similar to other constrained tree automata [5, 21, 24], it additionally supports semantic constraints (e.g., logical entailment), rather than being lim-ited to syntactic equality or dis-equality constraints [5, 21]. For instance, Fig. 2 presents an LTA that captures the space of terms represented by the following sentence 

{f (t1, t 2) | t1, t 2 ∈ { ϕ1, ϕ 2, ϕ 3} ∧ t1 =⇒ t2}

where both sub-trees are constrained using a logical entailment 

constraint (defined later) on the transition ( l ⊨r). States are depicted as circles and transitions as rectangles. Each transition may have zero or more incoming states, and each incoming edge is annotated with a position label, shown in red in the figure. Here, l and r are variables that capture a specific position in the automaton and the constraint restricts which choice of t1 and t2 are acceptable. The automaton accepts terms f (ϕ2, ϕ 1) and f (ϕ3, ϕ 1) since, in both cases, the constraint ϕi =⇒ ϕj holds; however, it rejects other syntactically valid terms like f (ϕ1, ϕ 2) and f (ϕ1, ϕ 3) where the constraint does not hold. 

Representing Refinement Types using LTA. The above characteristics make LTAs effective at providing a compact embedding for rich type structures. Fig. 3 illustrates this, showing a transition in a trivial LTA representing a variable x

with refinement type { ν : int | 10 ≥ ν ≥ 0 }. The automaton rooted at state 

q0 corresponds to the refinement type { ν : int | 10 ≥ ν ≥ 0 }, while the overall LTA represents a binding x : { ν : int | 10 ≥ ν ≥ 0 }. 

Typing Semantics as LTA Transition Constraints. For component-based synthe-sis, an LTA must accept only well-refinement-typed programs. LTA construction therefore mirrors typing derivations, ensuring that ill-typed programs are ex-cluded by construction via LTA transition constraints. Fig. 4 shows a portion of the LTA for the example library, embedding the semantics for function application. Transition app corresponds to a function ap-plication expression in a standard refinement-typed calculus. Incoming state qf

models the set of all single-argument library functions and their types. We have grayed out functions other than decr for clarity. The type edge for function decr ,  

> 3A detailed elaboration of these points can be found in the Appendix. Liquid Tree Automata 5

has two children, one for its input argument type and another for its return type, with location labels in and out respectively. State qa models the set of all scalar arguments (showing only x). The argument’s type is represented in the usual way for a base refinement type as shown in Fig. 3. The application typing semantics requires that the type of an actual argument be a subtype of the corresponding formal argument type. This requirement is captured by constraints a○ and b○.Constraint b○ enforces equality of the underlying base types, while constraint a○ ensures logical implication between the corresponding refinement formulas. 

Fig. 4: An LTA fragment embedding a refinement typing semantics for function application. Additionally, a typing semantics of-ten establishes logical entailment con-straints between formulas under asubstitution. A good example is the inferred type for an app term and the function’s return type. LTAs model this using the constraints c○,that equates base types, and d○,that captures the logical entailment (fun .out .ref ⊨ type .ref ) under the usual mapping of the actual argument to the formal for each possible choice of the function and the argument, modeled using a compact substitution relation over variables using a sub-stitution over positions, shown as [ 

arg /fun .in ]. 

Efficient Pruning and Enumeration. 

We exploit LTA structure to develop a CBS algorithm that combines two complementary reduction strategies. First, we prune automaton states that cannot participate in any well-typed pro-gram. Second, we identify semantic similarity between program fragments using refinement subtyping, enabling eager pruning of logically similar paths during search through merging of logically equivalent subautomata. Our key insight is that the intersection operation on tree automata generalizes naturally to a notion of semantic intersection over LTAs, which enables efficient enumeration even when feasible solutions are sparse. This allows the synthesizer to prune large regions of the search space that differ syntactically but are equivalent or subsumed semantically. We implement this approach in a tool called Hegel . Our evaluation shows that Hegel can synthesize programs for complex, highly constrained CBS queries that are beyond the reach of existing systems, while maintaining soundness and completeness. This paper makes the following contributions: 

– We address scalability and expressivity limitations in existing CBS frame-works, especially in the presence of queries with rich refinement-type speci-fications. 6 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

– We introduce Liquid Tree Automata (LTA), a tree automata variant that allows direct embedding of refinement-type specifications. 

– We develop a novel synthesis procedure over LTAs, incorporating pruning and similarity-based reductions, and prove the procedure sound and com-plete. 

– We implement our approach in Hegel , a CBS tool for OCaml programs; our evaluation results demonstrate significant scalability improvements over existing systems. 

# 2 Liquid Tree Automata                                            

> ϵ, p, p i∈Position
> ψa∈Atoms ::= true |false
> |p=p(Syntactic )
> |p⊨p(Semantic )
> θ∈Subs := [p/p ]
> ψ∈Ψ=::
> ψa| ¬ ψ
> |ψ∧ψ|ψ∨ψ
> |θ.ψ σ∈Schema ::= ⋆=⋆|⋆⊨⋆

Fig. 5: LTA Constraints The target language of our synthesizer ( λlta ) is a stan-dard A-normalized [13] call-by-value refinement-typed 

λ-calculus [31] with constructors, constants and vari-ables, conditional expressions, and function abstrac-tion and application. To simplify the presentation, we assume all variables have a single unique binding-site. 

λlta types include standard base types like int , bool 

etc., along with algebraic types like lists and trees over these base types and type variables α1, α 2, etc. Re-finement types τ , include base refinements and arrow refinements . A base refinement { ν : t | ϕ } qualifies a term of base type t with a refinement qualifier ϕ ∈ Φ.An arrow refinement refines a function type, where the argument x can occur free in the qualifier. The set of qualifiers ( Φ) consist of first-order predicate logic formulae over base-typed variables along with method predicates ( Q), which are user-defined, uninterpreted function symbols such as len and ord over lists used in our motivating example. A type context Γ records term variables and library functions g with their types. It also records a set of propositions relevant to a specific context. 

Definition 1 (Positions in a term). A position p in a term t is of the form 

i.j.k....n , a sequence of positive integers describing a path from the root of t to a sub-term. This describes what symbols are present at each position, relative to the root. 

For easier comprehension, we give human-readable labels to each number in a position. For example, consider Fig. 4 - the sequences used in the constraints like 

arg .type .base = fun .type .in .base are positions. type .ref is a synonym for position 

1.3, fun .in .type .base for 2.1.1.2, etc. 

Constraints in Liquid Tree Automata An LTA constraint ψ is a predicate on terms in λlta . It is defined inductively over positions and Boolean connectives, as shown in Fig. 5. A valid atomic constraint ψa includes Boolean constants like 

true and false , as well as syntactic equality between positions, given by p = p and 

semantic entailment over positions, given by p ⊨ p. A constraint ψ is either a ψaLiquid Tree Automata 7

or a constraint generated using Boolean connectives over other constraints. In several cases, these constraints require variable substitution at one position with another; this is captured using a list of substitutions Subs (θ), and a constraint 

θ.ψ . Consequently, we can also classify atomic constraints into kinds using two constraint schemas, ⋆ = ⋆ and ⋆ ⊨ ⋆, respectively. 

Definition 2 (Liquid Tree Automata). A Liquid Tree Automata, A defined over a finite ranked alphabet F derived from λlta , is a tuple ( Q, F, Qf , ∆), where: 

– Q is a finite set of states. 

– Qf ⊆ Q is a set of final states. 

– ∆ ⊆ Qn × F × Ψ 7 → Q, is a set of constrained transitions . Each transition rule is of the form f (q1, q 2, ...q n) ψ

,−→q, where f ∈ F with arity n, and a set of states q1, q 2, . . . q n ∈ Q and ψ ∈ Ψ is a valid constraint. Here q is the target state. 

Language of a Liquid Tree Automaton JAK The language accepted by a LTA A, is the set of all terms in λlta with some successful run of A. This is, in fact, the set of all well-typed λlta terms, constructed using the methods found in a li-brary.                                  

> JqK::= S
> i(JδiK)where δi=(f(qi1, q i2,. . . , qin )ψ
> ,−→q)
> JδK::= { f t i|ti∈JqiK,f t i⊨ψ,
> i∈[1 . . . n ]}, where
> δ= ( f(q1, q 2,. . . , qn)ψ
> ,−→q)
> Jδ⊥K:= ∅
> JAK::= S
> i{JqiK|qi∈Qf}

Fig. 6: LTA denotations. Formally, we define the language accepted by A using its denotation JAK (see Fig. 6). The denotation of a state q, JqK is the set union of the denotations of each of the transitions δi, JδiK, for which q is a tar-get state. The denotation of a transition 

δ builds a set of all terms, using the sym-bol at the current transition ( f ) and terms in the denotation of states incoming in δ,filtering all terms that do not satisfy the transition constraint ψ. Symbols f ∈ F 

include all λlta terms including variables (x), constants ( c), conditional expressions ( if b then e else e), function abstractions and applications, and types ( τ ). Intuitively, the satisfaction of a constraint by a term t ⊨ ψ maps syntactic equality constraints to equality of symbols and semantic entailment between qualifiers to logical entailment of FOL formulas. We also have a special bottom transition δ⊥, whose denotation is an empty set. Since an LTA can have multiple final states given by the set Qf , the language it accepts is the union of the denotation for all its final states. 

# 3 Synthesis using Liquid Tree Automata 

We formalize synthesis using LTAs by defining a consistency relation between a typing environment Γ and a LTA A.8 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Definition 3 (Consistency between LTAs and Type Environments). Atype environment Γ is consistent with an LTA A = (Q, F, Qf , ∆) iff 

∀e, Γ (e) = τ ⇐⇒ ∃A ′ such that A′ is a sub-automaton 4 of A and e ∈ JA′K.

Definition 4 (Synthesis Problem with LTAs). Given a type environment 

Γ that relates library functions fi = λ(xi,j ).e fi with their refinement types fi :(xi,j : τi,j ) → { ν : ti | ϕi} ∈ Γ , and a synthesis query φ = ( yi : τi) → { ν : t | ϕ},a solution to a CBS problem is a LTA A, such that forall all e ∈ JAK, Γ ⊢ e : φ

and Γ is consistent with A.

3.1 Synthesis Algorithm 

The main synthesis algorithm, LTASynthesize is shown in Algorithm 1. It takes as input an alphabet F, which includes symbols from λlta and an annotated library of functions, a synthesis query specification φ, and a bound on the size of the terms k to synthesize. The algorithm works in two phases: (1) an exploration phase adds states and transitions, expanding the automata. The resulting LTA is then pruned/reduced by (2) a reduction phase. The algorithm also keeps track of similar but not yet reduced transitions through an equivalence set E. The output of the algorithm is a pair consisting of (i) an LTA, Amin for the synthesis query based on F and the typing semantics of λlta , and (ii) a set of solution terms in λlta , possibly using F that satisfies the query specification. The algorithm returns a failure value ( ⊥) if it cannot find a solution within the given max-depth k.The algorithm begins (line 1) by initializing the similarity set E to ∅ and constructing an initial LTA A0 using the well-formedness procedure WF . Given the library F and an empty automaton A⊥, WF deterministically constructs an LTA that represents all well-formed terms of size one consistent with the typing rules in Fig. 7, including the query specification φ. In particular, initialization introduces states and transitions corresponding to query arguments, library func-tions, base refinement types, and a distinguished final transition encoding the top-level constraint of φ.At line 2, the algorithm checks whether the language of A0 is non-empty using procedure NEmpty (lines 14-15), which identifies final states whose denotation is non-empty. If such states exist, the algorithm extracts the set of solution terms using the LTA denotation J·K (Fig. 6) and returns (A0, JA0K) (line 3). Otherwise, the algorithm invokes procedure Enumerate (lines 5-13), which performs iter-ative exploration and reduction of the search space. If Enumerate is invoked at depth k, it returns ⊥, indicating synthesis failure. When the depth of A is less than the bound k, Enumerate first enters an explo-ration phase by extending A with new transitions using procedure Transition 

(line 6). This step applies the typing rules in Fig. 7 to construct larger well-typed terms.  

> 4A sub-automaton is defined using a subset definition over states and transitions.

Liquid Tree Automata 9

LTASynthesize (⟨F , φ = ( xi : τi) → { v :

t|ϕ}, k ⟩)// Initialize  

> (1)

A0 ← WF (F, A⊥); E ← ∅

// Check solution in Initial 

A0 

> (2)

if ˆQ = NEmpty (A0) then  

> (3)

return (A0, S 

> q∈ˆQ

JAq K)

// Iteratively explore-reduce-check  

> (4)

return Enumerate (A0, φ, k)

Enumerate (⟨F , A, φ = ( xi : τi) → { v :

t|ϕ}, k ⟩) 

> (5)

if depth ( A) < k then  

> (6)

A ← Transition (F, A);  

> (7)

A ← Prune (A);  

> (8)

E ← Similarity (A, E);  

> (9)

(Amin , E) ← Minimize (A, E);  

> (10)

if ˆQ = NEmpty (Amin ) then  

> (11)

return (Amin , S 

> q∈ˆQ

JAq K) 

> (12)

Enumerate (Amin , φ, k)

else  

> (13)

return ⊥

NEmpty (⟨A⟩ ) 

> (14)

ˆQ ← { qf | qf ∈ Qf , Jqf K̸ = ∅ } 

> (15)

return ˆQ

Algorithm 1: Synthesis Algorithm. The algorithm then enters a re-duction phase. It first applies Prune 

(line 7) to eliminate unreachable or ill-typed portions of the automa-ton. Next, similarity relations be-tween transitions are identified using 

Similarity (line 8), producing an up-dated equivalence set E. Finally, Min-imize (line 9) applies the minimiza-tion rules ( M-Trans ) and ( M-LTA )from Fig. 9 to merge semantically re-dundant states and transitions, yield-ing a reduced automaton Amin .At line 10, the algorithm again checks whether the language of 

Amin is non-empty. If so, it returns 

(Amin , JAmin K) (line 11). Otherwise, the algorithm recurses on Amin , con-tinuing the explore–reduce–check loop until a solution is found or the depth bound is exceeded. 

3.2 LTA Construction 

The transitions ∆ for a LTA A

are constructed using the Well-formedness and Transitions judg-ments given in Fig. 7. The latter judgment holds if, given library F and automata 

A, a new n-ary transition can be added to A corresponding to an n-ary symbol 

f ∈ F , with q1, q 2, ..., q n being the incoming states in the transition and q being the target state, such that ψ captures the typing constraints for the valid terms in the language of the transition J.K 5 We begin by generalizing the definition of 

term at a position (Definition 1) to LTAs. Given a state q (or transition δ), and a position p, we define LTA states at a position (equivalently, LTA transitions at a position) p from q (or δ), denoted as q ▶ p (or δ ▶ p): 

Definition 5 (Transitions at a position, q ▶ p). For each δi = ( f (qi1, q i2,. . . , qin )

> ψ

,−→ q). q ▶ ϵ = { q} and q ▶ j.p = S

> i

(δi ▶ j.p ), where δ ▶ j.p = qj ▶ p if j ≤ n

(arity of δi) and ∅ otherwise.  

> 5

For perspicuity, we have elided several details about polymorphic transition con-struction and type inference; these mostly concern proper scope management within an LTA. The complete set of rules can be found in the Appendix. 10 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Well-formedness F, A ⊢ wf f ∈ F (qi) ψ

,−→q

wf-prim t ∈ TF qt /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ wf t() ,−→qt

wf-pred ϕ ∈ ΦF qϕ /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ wf ϕ, −→qϕ

wf-var x ∈ Vars F qx /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ wf x, −→qx

wf-base (τ ≡ { x : t | ϕ}) ∈ τF qτ /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ wf τ (qx, q t, q ϕ),−→qτ

wf-arrow 

(τ→ ≡ τi → τj ) ∈ τF

τi, τ j ∈ τF qτ→ /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ wf ττ →(qτi , q τj ),−→qτ→ Q-goal 

φ = ( xi : τi) → τ qterm k , q τ ∈ Qqgoal ∈ Qf

ψ = SubType (qterm k ▶ type , q goal ▶ type )

F, A ⊢ wf goal (qτ , q term k ) ψ

,−→qgoal 

Transitions F, A ⊢ f ∈ F (qi) ψ

,−→q

e-app 

qf , q a ∈ Q τ (qi),−→qτ ∈ ∆θ = [ qa ▶ ϵ/q f ▶ in ]

ψ = SubType (qa ▶ type , q f ▶ in )∧

θ. (SubType (qf ▶ out , q app ▶ type )) 

F, A ⊢ app (qτ , q f , q a) ψ

,−→qapp 

e-var x : τ ∈ F qx /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ x(qτ ),−→qx

e-const 

⊢ c : τ ∈ F 

qc /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ c(qτ ),−→qc e-if 

qb, q t, q f ∈ Q τ (qi),−→qτ ∈ ∆ψ = (( qb ▶ ref ) ∧ SubType (qt ▶ type , q if ▶ type )) ∧

(¬(qb ▶ ref ) ∧ SubType (qf ▶ type , q if ▶ type )) 

F, A ⊢ if (qτ , q b, q t, q f ) ψ

,−→qif 

SubType (δi, δ j ) = 



(τi(qi) ψi

,−→qτi , τ j (qj ) ψj

,−→qτj ) i.type .t = j.type .t

∧ i.type .ref ⊨ j.type .ref 

(τ→i (qi) ψi

,−→qτ→i , τ →j (qj ) ψj

,−→qτ→j ) SubType (δj ▶ in , δ i ▶ in )

∧ SubType (δi ▶ out , δ j ▶ out )(_, _) true 

(1) 

Fig. 7: Selected rules for constructing transitions ∆, basis for WF and Transi-tion .Liquid Tree Automata 11 

Well-formedness Rules Given an alphabet F (library and query), a current LTA A, and the well-formedness typing semantics of λlta , we construct LTAs using judgments of the form F, A ⊢ wf f ∈ F (qi) ψ

,−→q, which determine when a transition may be added to A. These rules characterize when leaf and composite transitions may be added for base types, predicates, variables, refinement types, arrow types, and polymorphic types, and directly mirror the well-formedness typing rules of λlta .To illustrate the behavior of these rules, Fig. 8 shows the application of the well-formedness and transition rules from Fig. 7 over a small example library of terms given below: 

F = { f : ( n : int ) → (l : {v : [ a] | len (v) > 0 }) → { v : [ a] | len (v) > 0}, 

xs : {v : [ int ] | len (v) > 0}; ys : [ bool ]}}Assume that our query φ is given by the refinement type: (xs : { v : [int] | len (v) > 0}) → {ν : [int] | len ( ν) > len (xs)} and the value of k, the term size is 2. Rule wf-prim (the corresponding LTA construction is shown using the box labeled with 3○ in Fig. 8) introduces a state qt and a nullary transition labeled 

t for each primitive type t, like char , int , etc., in the language. Rule wf-pred 

similarly adds leaf transitions for refinement formula ϕ in some annotation in F

or in the query. Rule wf-base (shown with 2○) introduces a state qτ for each well-formed base refinement type τ = {x : t | ϕ} and adds a ternary transition with incoming states qx, qt, and qϕ corresponding to the bound variable, base type, and refinement formula, respectively. These states are provided by earlier applications of wf-var , wf-prim , and wf-pred .Rule wf-arrow ( 1 ○) generates similar transitions for each arrow refinement type, with a symbol τ→ and two incoming states for the argument-type and the result-type for the arrow. Rule Q-goal introduces a distinguished final state 

qgoal and a goal transition connecting sub-automata rooted at qterm k , repre-senting candidate terms of size k. The associated constraint ψ enforces that the synthesized term’s return type is a subtype of the query’s annotated return type, as generated by SubType .Our extended λlta and typing semantics also include type and refinement ab-stractions, allowing parametric polymorphism in the refinement types setting [20, 31]. Consequently, the above rules also extend naturally to these abstractions and their corresponding type and refinement applications. 

Expression Transition Rules Transition judgments are similar in structure to the well-formedness judgments, but simulate the refinement type judgments for the expressions and types in the λlta . These rules specify how to add transitions corresponding to λlta expressions and types. Each n-ary expression transition has n+1 incoming states, with the state at the position zero capturing the sub-automata for the possible types of the expression. 12 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Fig. 8: Application of Well-formedness and Transition rules to construct initial LTA A0 and A1 for the example library. Rules E-var (construction shown in Fig. 8, 5○) and E-const introduce transitions for variables and constants together with their types. Rule E-var 

( 1 ○) applies to both scalar variables and variables bound to functions; ac-cordingly, the associated type τ is rep-resented either as a base refinement (via wf-base ) or as an arrow refine-ment (via wf-arrow ). Rule E-app (Figure 8, 6○) intro-duces transitions corresponding to function application expressions. It assumes the states qf and qa are already present for the function f

and argument a. It first constructs a transition for the application’s result type τ using the well-formedness judg-ments, with qτ as the target state. The inferred transition uses app 

as its symbol and has three incom-ing states, corresponding to the result type ( qτ ), the function ( qf ), and the argument ( qa). The key aspect of this rule is the set of constraints ψ asso-ciated with the transition. These con-straints relate the three subautomata rooted at qτ , qf , and qa, and encode the standard refinement-typing semantics of function application [31]. These constraints first apply the standard substitu-tion of the possible formal arguments in the function with the actual arguments. This is done via creating a substitution θ between positions given formally as [qa ▶ ϵ/q f ▶ in ]. Second, the rule uses an auxiliary function SubType (Equa-tion 1), which given two transitions, returns constraints sufficient to capture the subtype relation between their types. For example, ψ in E-app captures two main relations. The first is a subtyping constraint between a function’s formal argument and the actual expression passed as the argument ( SubType 

(qa ▶ type , q f ▶ in )). The second subtype relation is between the function’s result type and the type of the app expression, under the mapping θ between the formal and the actual arguments. This is given by θ. ( SubType (qf ▶ out , q app ▶ type )). Note that the E-App rule is sufficiently general to allow synthesis to support 

partial (i.e., higher-order) function applications. Rule E-if introduces transitions for conditional expressions using subautomata for the Boolean condition (rooted at qb) and the two branches (rooted at qt and qf ). The associated constraints encode the standard refinement typing semantics of conditionals: the true branch Liquid Tree Automata 13 

is constrained under the assumption that the condition holds, while the false branch is constrained under its negation. 

# 4 LTA Reductions 

4.1 Prune 

The LTA formulation in Section 2 accepts only well-typed terms from the λlta .However, we can make the synthesis procedure more efficient by eagerly reduc-ing portions of the automata (i.e. sub-automata) which are irrelevant to the construction of any solution. The inference rules for pruning irrelevant code, which underlie the Prune 

routine in Algorithm 1, are shown in Fig. 9. These rules are expressed using two judgment forms. The judgment A ⊢ ∆ ⇝ ∆′ defines how a set of transitions ∆ is reduced to a pruned set ∆′ within an LTA A. This reduction relies on a second judgment form, A ⊢ (δi, δ j ) ⇝ψa δ′, which specifies how a pair of transitions 

δi, δj are reduced under an atomic constraint ψa using syntactic or semantic intersection operation, yielding a possibly simplified transition δ′.The p-trans rule applies these atomic reductions to transition sets. Given a transition δ with constraint ψ, assumed to be a conjunction of atomic con-straints ψj relating transitions at positions p1 and p2, the rule updates the set of transitions at position p1 (denoted δ ▶ p1). Each such transition is replaced by its reduced form, producing an updated transition set ∆r computed using the atomic reduction rules described below. Rule p-syn-eq handles syntactic equality constraints over positions p1 and 

p2. It performs a syntactic intersection [21, 5] over the two set of transitions at these position. Syntactic intersection ( ⊓Syntax ) is a standard tree intersection operation. Intuitively, it compares the two transitions for syntactic equality of transition symbols while recursively intersecting each incoming state in the tran-sition. The rule updates each transition in δ ▶ p1, with its syntactic intersection with some transition in δ ▶ p2.Rule p-sym-ent handles semantic entailment constraints, where ψj has the form θ. p i ⊨ pj . In this case, syntactic intersection is insufficient, since the for-mulas associated with positions p1 and p2 cannot be compared by syntactic equality alone. We therefore introduce a semantic intersection operation, de-noted ⊓ψ

Semantics shown in Equation 4, which applies to transitions carrying refinement qualifiers. Given two such transitions, the operation checks whether the refinement for-mula at position p1 (extracted using an auxiliary function Symbol over the transi-tion) logically entails the formula at position p2 under the substitution θ and the interpretation of the environment Γ , shown as ( JΓ K ∧ JθK.JϕiK =⇒ Jϕj K). If the entailment holds, the intersection yields the transition at the more specific posi-tion p1, otherwise, it returns a bottom transition δ⊥. All bottom transitions are subsequently eliminated by normalization. Intuitively, this operation compares transitions modeling refinement formulas in two types, and keeps the sub-type 14 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Pruning A ⊢ ∆ ⇝ ∆′ | A ⊢ (δi, δ j ) ⇝ψa δ′

p-trans 

δ ≡ f (. . . ) ψj ∧... 

,−−−−→q ψj ≡ p1(= |⊨)p2

δi ∈ δ ▶ p1 δj ∈ δ ▶ p2

∆r = {δi,r | A ⊢ (δi, δ j ) ⇝ψj δi,r }A ⊢ ∆ ⇝ ∆[δ ▶ p1/∆ r ]

δ ≡ f (. . . ) ψj ∧... 

,−−−−→q ψj ≡ p1 = p2

δ1 ∈ δ ▶ p1 δ2 ∈ δ ▶ p2

δr = ⊓Syntax (δ1, δ 2)

A ⊢ (δ1, δ 2) ⇝ψj δr p-syn-eq 

δ ≡ f (. . . ) ψj ∧... 

,−−−−→q ψj ≡ θ.p 1 ⊨ p2

δ1 ∈ δ ▶ p1 δ2 ∈ δ ▶ p2 δr = ⊓ψj

Semantics (δ1, δ 2)

A ⊢ (δ1, δ 2) ⇝ψj δr p-sem-ent 

Similarity A ⊢ sim δi ≲ δj | A ⊢ E ⇝ E′

s-trans 

ψ<: = SubType (δi ▶ type , δ j ▶ type )

δ⊥ /∈ ⊓ ψ<:

Semantics (δi ▶ type , δ j ▶ type )

A ⊢ sim δi ≲ δj

(δi, δ j ) /∈ E A ⊢ sim δi ≲ δj

A ⊢ E ⇝ E ∪ { (δi, δ j )} s-eq 

Minimization (A, E) ⊢ ∆ ⇝ ∆′ | ⊢ (A, E) ⇝ (A′, E′)

m-trans 

δi, δ j ∈ ∆ (δi, δ j ) ∈ E 

δi ≡ f (q1, q 2, . . . q j . . . q n) ψi

,−→qi

δj ≡ f ′(q′

> 1

, q ′

> 2

, . . . q ′

> m

) ψj

,−→qj

∆′ = S 

> k

{δk [qj /q i]

| δk = ˆf ( ˆ q1, qj, . . . ˆqm) ,→ ˆqk }

(A, E) ⊢ ∆ ⇝ (∆ ∪ ∆′) \ { δj }A ≡ (Q, F, Q f , ∆ )(A, E) ⊢ ∆ ⇝⋆ ∆′

⊢ (A, E) ⇝ (( Q, F, Q f , ∆ ′), ∅) m-lta 

⊓ψ

Semantics (δi, δ j ) = 



δi σ(ψj ) = θ.⋆ ⊨ ⋆, Symbol (δi) = ϕi, Symbol (δj ) = ϕj ,

Given the automaton A, s.t. R(Γ, A)

JΓ K ∧ JθK.JϕiK =⇒ Jϕj K

δ⊥ otherwise 

(2) 

Fig. 9: Selective rules for similarity inference and LTA Minimization. Liquid Tree Automata 15 

transition 6. The intersection operations form the basis of Prune procedure in 

LTASynthesize .

4.2 Similarity and Minimize 

The similarity inference rules are defined by the Similarity judgments in Fig. 9. The S-trans rule characterizes when two transitions are considered similar ,based on the relationship between their associated type sub-automata. Similarity is determined by the constraint ψ<: = SubType (δi ▶ type , δ j ▶

type ), which checks whether the types associated with the two transitions are related by the standard subtyping relation induced by the typing semantics of 

λlta . Rule S-eq enumerates pairs of transitions from A that are not yet recorded in the similarity set, and adds to E whenever the similarity constraint holds. 

Similarity Reduction . The similarity relation gives us a principled minimiza-tion strategy for LTAs, in which transitions that are similar up to subtyping are merged, retaining only the most specific representative. The minimization rules in Fig. 9 formalize this process. The first judgment form, (A, E) ⊢ ∆ ⇝ ∆′, defines how the transition set of an LTA is reduced using the similarity relation E. As specified by Rule M-trans , when two similar transitions are identified, the transition corresponding to the supertype is removed, while the transition corresponding to the subtype is retained. All incoming edges that previously targeted the removed transition are redirected to the retained one, preserving reachability within the automaton. The second judgment, formalized by Rule M-lta , lifts transition minimization to the level of entire LTAs. It computes a minimized transition set ∆′ by ap-plying a transitive closure of the transition update rules. The alphabet F of the automaton remains unchanged during this process. After minimization, the similarity set E is reset, since all similar transitions have either been merged or eliminated. Note that equivalence of terms (and of their corresponding sub-automata) is strictly stronger than similarity. As a result, similarity-based reduction also sub-sumes equivalence-based pruning, eliminating both semantically equivalent and strictly less-specific sub-automata. This unified treatment enables aggressive re-duction of redundant terms, leading to efficient enumeration over a substantially reduced search space. 

# 5 Handling Cycles 

Although our LTA definition is general and allows cycles, our treatment thus far has deliberately excluded cycles for ease of elucidation. However, the underlying refinement-typed language λlta often contain terms whose specifications require both general parametric polymorphism (types depending on other (non-refined types)), as well as abstract refinements [32], i.e., refinement types parameterized   

> 6A detailed example can be found in the accompanying Appendix. 16 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan

with refinement predicates. Precisely capturing these specifications will require cyclic edges in the LTA. For instance, cycles allow us to model the space where a type variable α can be instantiated with any type (both base and refined), and a refinement variable ϕ to any well-formed refinement formula. This is shown graphically in Fig. 10. 

Fig. 10: Cycles in LTA for polymorphic types and abstract refinements. States in cycles are colored. The state qt captures all valid base-refinement types, where a poly-morphic list constructor List can be instantiated with any possible type (the cyclic edge back to qt). The re-finement formula in τ in turn can be instantiated with all valid refinement predicates captured by another state 

qϕ, with standard predicates like { 

ν ≥ 0, ν < 0, etc.,}, Method pred-icates ( Q(ν)), as well as conjunction and disjunction of other predicates (cyclic edges from qϕ). Such cycles effectively represent an unbounded sequence of refine-ments and types characterized by po-sition constraints. Thus, any transi-tion constraint referring to a state/transition that is part of a cycle would re-sult in a logical formula that duplicates and accumulates predicates for every potential iteration, making the formula unwieldy for the solvers. To maintain tractability, we impose a structural restriction, conceptually similar to earlier works [21], on the LTA: the position constraints associated with any transition are prohibited from referring to a state that participates in a cycle. We formally define this using a Dependency Graph for an LTA, and when are LTA constraints 

Well-formed : The acyclic constraint restriction enables us to prevent the infinite unrolling of logical obligations, ensuring that the resulting SMT queries are well-behaved, while still supporting the polymorphic types and abstract refinements in specifications. Additionally, the above structural restriction on constraints al-lows us to directly extend our semantic intersection and pruning strategies to cyclic forms 7.

# 6 Soundness and Completeness 

For a given upper bound k on the size of programs being synthesized, the LTA-Synthesize algorithm is both sound and complete assuming the validity of each library function against their specifications. 8   

> 7Additional details about the Cyclic LTA can be found in an accompanying Appendix
> 8Proofs can be found can be found in the accompanying Appendix. Liquid Tree Automata 17

Theorem 1 (Soundness). Given a type environment Γ that relates library functions fi = λ(xi,j ).e fi with their refinement types fi : ( xi,j : τi,j ) → { ν : ti |

ϕi} ∈ Γ , and a synthesis query φ = ( yi : τi) → { ν : t | ϕ}, if LTASynthesize 

(Γ, φ, k) =( Amin , Terms = {e | e ∈ JAmin K }), then ∀e ∈ Terms , Γ ⊢ e : φ,where Γ is consistent with Amin .

Theorem 2 (Completeness). Given a type environment Γ that relates library functions fi = λ(xi,j ).e fi with their refinement types fi : ( xi,j : τi,j ) → { ν : ti |

ϕi} ∈ Γ , and a synthesis query φ = ( yi : τi) → { ν : t | ϕ}, if LTASynthesize 

(Γ, φ, k) = ⊥, then ∄ a term e ∈ JAcomplete K containing fewer than k + 1 library function calls, such that Γ ⊢ e : φ and Γ is consistent with Acomplete . Where 

Acomplete is the complete LTA of size k, for the given Γ , generated without any reduction. 

# 7 Evaluation 

Our evaluation considers the following three research questions: 

RQ1 Effectiveness of Hegel : How effectively does Hegel (shown as He) synthe-size programs satisfying complex refinement-type specifications, compared to other specification-guided, component-based synthesis tools? 

RQ2 Scalability with query complexity : As synthesis queries increase in size and control-flow complexity, how well does Hegel scale in terms of success rate and synthesis time? 

RQ3 Impact of LTA reduction strategies : What is the impact of pruning and similarity-based reductions on LTA size, search-space reduction, and overall synthesis efficiency? 

7.1 RQ1: Effectiveness and Comparison with Other tools 

Benchmarks To address RQ1, We evaluate Hegel on 14 benchmark queries drawn from Hoogle+ [17] and Hectare [21], re-implemented in OCaml and classified into first order, higher order, and polymorphic categories. Each query is refined using three distinct refinement specifications, yielding 42 total benchmarks 9.We evaluate Hegel against Hoogle+ and Synquid [27], a deductive synthesis tool based on refinement types. A detailed description of the benchmark set is provided in the supplemental material. 

Results Fig. 11 summarizes synthesis time and LTA minimization statistics for select benchmarks (20/42) where at least one other tool succeeded. Hegel suc-cessfully synthesizes solutions for all 42 benchmarks, with a maximum runtime of 11 seconds and an average runtime of 7.6 seconds. In contrast, Hoogle+ solves only 6 benchmarks and is approximately 6x slower on those instances. Synquid   

> 9A detailed description of our benchmark set and evaluation results can be found in the accompanying Appendix. 18 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan

Fig. 11: Synthesis Results for selected RQ1 Benchmarks where at least one of the baselines tools succeeded. Synthesis time in seconds (Left) and LTA Minimiza-tion, showing # states without LTA reductions (|Q|) vs with LTA reductions (|Q| Min) (Right). solves 20 benchmarks and is on average 4.5x slower than Hegel on commonly solved queries. Hectare is omitted as it does not support refinement based spec-ifications. 22.5% of the total synthesis time on the RQ1 benchmarks was spent on solv-ing SMT queries. Note that Hegel improves overall SMT query cost by reducing the number of such queries needed for synthesis compared to enumerative tech-niques, leading to substantial improvement in synthesis times. Across benchmarks, LTA minimization substantially reduces the automaton size, with an average reduction of 73%, directly contributing to improved syn-thesis performance. All experiments were conducted with a timeout of 3 minutes and a maximum synthesis bound of five library function calls, 

7.2 RQ2, Scaling Hegel to larger and complex queries 

Benchmarks . To evaluate scalability, we consider eight synthesis queries adapted from verification benchmarks involving stateful database applications [16]. These benchmarks require longer call sequences, explicit state threading, and nontriv-ial control flow. All benchmarks are expressed using monadic state passing to enable compositional synthesis. 

Results . Hegel successfully synthesizes solutions for all RQ2 benchmarks, with synthesis times ranging from 22.7 seconds to slightly over one minute. The av-erage size of for these solutions is around 19 function calls (maximum being 33) with around 4 control flow branches on average. Synquid solves only the smallest benchmarks, requiring over two minutes in those cases, and times out on all larger instances. Hoogle+ fails to solve any benchmark within the time-out of 6 minutes. Across these benchmarks, the average number of LTA states constructed is approximately 1200. Pruning and minimization reduce the state Liquid Tree Automata 19 

space by roughly 70 percent, enabling Hegel to scale to substantially more com-plex synthesis tasks than existing tools. 

7.3 RQ3: Impact of irrelevant code pruning and similarity reduction 

To evaluate the impact of LTA reductions, we conduct ablation experiments using three restricted variants of Hegel : one disabling pruning, one disabling similarity reduction, and a baseline disabling both. We compare variants in terms of total synthesis time and the number of enumerated program terms, relative to the baseline. For RQ1 benchmarks, disabling either pruning or similarity reduction increases synthesis time by 2-3x, while disabling both causes failures on nearly half of the benchmarks. For RQ2 benchmarks, pruning alone is insufficient to ensure scalability, with the variant disabling similarity reduction failing on 3 out of 9 queries. Across both benchmark categories, the full system achieves the smallest search space, while restricted variants enumerate 2-4.5x more terms without corresponding gains in solvability. These results demonstrate that both pruning and similarity based reductions are necessary to achieve efficient and scalable refinement typed component based synthesis. 

# 8 Related Work 

Component-based Synthesis. There is a long line of work on the use of CBS in the context of domain-specific languages [9, 18] as well as general-purpose programming domains [10, 14, 8, 15, 28, 33, 25]. Unlike us, most prior CBS ap-proaches rely on base types [14, 10] or limited effect information [15]. Our con-tributions in this paper extend prior work by enabling CBS to be applied when specifications and queries are equipped with logical refinements, substantially increasing the complexity of the search process. 

Using similarity/equality information for search. E-graphs [36] allows effi-cient reduction of an enumeration space similar to the motivation underlying our approach. Equality saturation has been applied to enable efficient abstraction learning [3] inductive synthesis [2] and program analysis [37]. These approaches rely on syntactic equivalence and do not directly support semantic similarity notions based on refinement subtyping or logical entailment. User provided logical equivalences have also been proposed [29] to accelerate synthesis, but do not scale to large component libraries. Our idea of similar-ity reduction is also related to the notion of observational equivalence found in programming-by-example synthesis aproaches [1, 23, 11]. These techniques com-pare synthesized programs on a given set of inputs and prune the search-space in a bottom-up, inductive synthesis setting. Its inherent unsoundness makes this mechanism infeasible for specification-guided synthesis. 

Tree automata for program synthesis. Tree automata have been used to compactly represent large spaces of programs [35, 21, 12, 7] in synthesis and ver-ification as discussed in earlier sections. However, these representations cannot express semantic relationships induced by refinement typing rules. 20 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Blaze [34] introduces abstract finite tree automata (AFTA), whose states like those of LTAs, are defined by a type and an associated predicate. However, the two models differ fundamentally. First, LTA state annotations are strictly more expressive. AFTA predicates are quantifier-free formulas over an abstract domain [26], whereas LTAs admit quantified formulas over program variables, enabling a direct encoding of refinement typing semantics and the use of re-finement subtyping to guide search and reduction. Second, unlike AFTA, LTAs support function types, higher-order programs, and let-bindings, leading to sub-stantially different synthesis algorithms. CTA [24] extends tree automata with logical transition guards from decidable theories, analogous to symbolic finite au-tomata(SFA) [6]. While this enables relational acceptance checking, CTA guards (true for SFA in general) cannot relate sub-automata as in LTA or ECTA, lim-iting their ability to capture typing and subtyping semantics. LTAs are strictly more general than ECTA since any ECTA can be represented as an LTA that only uses equality constraints. This can be done by replacing ternary transitions like τ (var, base, ref) (see Figure 3) with a unary one τ (base). The operation is similar to a standard type erasure operation [31]. 

Refinement types and conflict-driven learning for synthesis. Refine-ment types have been used previously to guide program synthesis [25, 27, 21], most notably in deductive synthesis systems such as Synquid [27]. These ap-proaches focus on deriving programs that satisfy refinement specifications, but do not address scalability in component based synthesis with large libraries as compared extensively in our evaluations. Other synthesis techniques based on conflict driven learning [25, 10] avoid re-exploring failing programs, but do not identify semantic equivalences among non failing candidates. Our approach com-plements refinement based synthesis by introducing a compact representation and similarity based reduction mechanism that scales to complex component based queries. 

# 9 Conclusions 

This paper presents a new component-based synthesis algorithm and tool, Hegel ,for libraries and queries equipped with refinement-type specifications. Such spec-ifications induce sparse solution spaces, rendering naive enumerative synthesis ineffective. We address this challenge using a novel tree automata variant, Liquid Tree Automata (LTA), which compactly represents the space of well-typed pro-grams, supports efficient construction, and enables semantics-driven pruning via refinement-based similarity. Our evaluation shows that Hegel scales to complex refinement-typed queries beyond the reach of existing synthesis techniques. 

# References  

> 1. Aws Albarghouthi, Sumit Gulwani, and Zachary Kincaid. Recursive Program Syn-thesis. In Natasha Sharygina and Helmut Veith, editors, Computer Aided Verifi-cation , pages 934–950, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Liquid Tree Automata 21 2. Matthew Bowers, Theo X. Olausson, Lionel Wong, Gabriel Grand, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Kevin Ellis, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Top-Down Synthesis for Library Learning. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 7(POPL), jan 2023. 3. David Cao, Rose Kunkel, Chandrakana Nandi, Max Willsey, Zachary Tatlock, and Nadia Polikarpova. Babble: Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 7(POPL), jan 2023. 4. Arthur Charguéraud, Jean-Christophe Filliâtre, Mário Pereira, and François Pot-tier. VOCAL – A Verified OCaml Library. ML Family Workshop, September 2017. 5. Hubert Comon. Tree Automata Techniques and Applications. 1997. 6. Loris D’antoni and Margus Veanes. Extended symbolic finite automata and trans-ducers. Form. Methods Syst. Des. , 47(1):93–119, August 2015. 7. Max Dauchet, Anne-Cécile Caron, and Jean-Luc Coquidé. Automata for Reduction Properties Solving. Journal of Symbolic Computation , 20(2):215–233, 1995. 8. Yu Feng, Ruben Martins, Osbert Bastani, and Isil Dillig. Program Synthesis Using Conflict-Driven Learning. In Proceedings of the 39th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation , PLDI 2018, page 420–435, New York, NY, USA, 2018. Association for Computing Machinery. 9. Yu Feng, Ruben Martins, Jacob Van Geffen, Isil Dillig, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Component-Based Synthesis of Table Consolidation and Transformation Tasks from Examples. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Pro-gramming Language Design and Implementation , PLDI 2017, page 422–436, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery. 10. Yu Feng, Ruben Martins, Yuepeng Wang, Isil Dillig, and Thomas W. Reps. Component-Based Synthesis for Complex APIs. In Proceedings of the 44th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages , POPL 2017, page 599–612, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Machinery. 11. Jack Feser, Işıl Dillig, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Inductive Program Synthesis Guided by Observational Program Similarity. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 7(OOP-SLA2), oct 2023. 12. Bernd Finkbeiner, Felix Klein, Ruzica Piskac, and Mark Santolucito. Synthesizing Functional Reactive Programs. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGPLAN Inter-national Symposium on Haskell , Haskell 2019, page 162–175, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. 13. Cormac Flanagan, Amr Sabry, Bruce F. Duba, and Matthias Felleisen. The Essence of Compiling with Continuations. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 1993 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation , PLDI ’93, page 237–247, New York, NY, USA, 1993. Association for Computing Machinery. 14. Zheng Guo, Michael James, David Justo, Jiaxiao Zhou, Ziteng Wang, Ranjit Jhala, and Nadia Polikarpova. Program Synthesis by Type-Guided Abstraction Refine-ment. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 4(POPL), December 2019. 15. Sankha Narayan Guria, Jeffrey S. Foster, and David Van Horn. RbSyn: Type- and Effect-Guided Program Synthesis. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation ,PLDI 2021, page 344–358, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. 16. Shachar Itzhaky, Tomer Kotek, Noam Rinetzky, Mooly Sagiv, Orr Tamir, Helmut Veith, and Florian Zuleger. On the Automated Verification of Web Applications with Embedded SQL. In Michael Benedikt and Giorgio Orsi, editors, 20th Inter-national Conference on Database Theory, ICDT 2017, March 21-24, 2017, Venice, 22 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Italy , volume 68 of LIPIcs , pages 16:1–16:18. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2017. 17. Michael B. James, Zheng Guo, Ziteng Wang, Shivani Doshi, Hila Peleg, Ranjit Jhala, and Nadia Polikarpova. Digging for Fold: Synthesis-Aided API Discovery for Haskell. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 4(OOPSLA), nov 2020. 18. Susmit Jha, Sumit Gulwani, Sanjit A. Seshia, and Ashish Tiwari. Oracle-Guided Component-Based Program Synthesis. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering - Volume 1 , ICSE ’10, page 215–224, New York, NY, USA, 2010. Association for Computing Machinery. 19. Ranjit Jhala and Niki Vazou. Refinement Types: A Tutorial. Found. Trends Program. Lang. , 6(3-4):159–317, 2021. 20. Gowtham Kaki and Suresh Jagannathan. A relational framework for higher-order shape analysis. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGPLAN International Confer-ence on Functional Programming , ICFP ’14, pages 311–324, New York, NY, USA, 2014. Association for Computing Machinery. 21. James Koppel, Zheng Guo, Edsko de Vries, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Nadia Polikarpova. Searching Entangled Program Spaces. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. ,6(ICFP), aug 2022. 22. Tessa A. Lau, Pedro Domingos, and Daniel S. Weld. Version Space Algebra and Its Application to Programming by Demonstration. In Proceedings of the Seven-teenth International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML ’00, page 527–534, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2000. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc. 23. Anders Miltner, Adrian Trejo Nuñez, Ana Brendel, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Işıl Dilig. Bottom-up Synthesis of Recursive Functional Programs Using Angelic Exe-cution. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 6(POPL), jan 2022. 24. Anders Miltner, Ziteng Wang, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Isil Dillig. Relational Syn-thesis of Recursive Programs via Constraint Annotated Tree Automata. In Com-puter Aided Verification: 36th International Conference, CAV 2024, Montreal, QC, Canada, July 24–27, 2024, Proceedings, Part III , page 41–63, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2024. Springer-Verlag. 25. Ashish Mishra and Suresh Jagannathan. Specification-Guided Component-Based Synthesis from Effectful Libraries. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 6(OOPSLA2), oct 2022. 26. Flemming Nielson, Hanne Riis Nielson, and Chris Hankin. Abstract Interpretation ,pages 211–282. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1999. 27. Nadia Polikarpova, Ivan Kuraj, and Armando Solar-Lezama. Program Synthesis from Polymorphic Refinement Types. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation , PLDI ’16, page 522–538, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery. 28. Kensen Shi, Jacob Steinhardt, and Percy Liang. FrAngel: Component-Based Syn-thesis with Control Structures. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 3(POPL), jan 2019. 29. Calvin Smith and Aws Albarghouthi. Program Synthesis with Equivalence Reduc-tion. In Constantin Enea and Ruzica Piskac, editors, Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation , pages 24–47, Cham, 2019. Springer International Pub-lishing. 30. Nikhil Swamy, Joel Weinberger, Cole Schlesinger, Juan Chen, and Benjamin Livshits. Verifying Higher-Order Programs with the Dijkstra Monad. In Proceed-ings of the 34th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation , PLDI ’13, page 387–398, New York, NY, USA, 2013. Associ-ation for Computing Machinery. Liquid Tree Automata 23 31. Niki Vazou, Alexander Bakst, and Ranjit Jhala. Bounded refinement types. In 

Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming , ICFP 2015, pages 48–61, New York, NY, USA, 2015. Association for Computing Machinery. 32. Niki Vazou, Patrick M. Rondon, and Ranjit Jhala. Abstract Refinement Types. In Matthias Felleisen and Philippa Gardner, editors, Programming Languages and Systems , pages 209–228, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 33. Chenglong Wang, Yu Feng, Rastislav Bodik, Alvin Cheung, and Isil Dillig. Visu-alization by Example. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 4(POPL), dec 2019. 34. Xinyu Wang, Isil Dillig, and Rishabh Singh. Program Synthesis using Abstraction Refinement. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 2(POPL), dec 2017. 35. Xinyu Wang, Işıl Dillig, and Rishabh Singh. Synthesis of Data Completion Scripts Using Finite Tree Automata. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 1(OOPSLA), oct 2017. 36. Max Willsey, Chandrakana Nandi, Yisu Remy Wang, Oliver Flatt, Zachary Tat-lock, and Pavel Panchekha. Egg: Fast and Extensible Equality Saturation. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 5(POPL), jan 2021. 37. Yihong Zhang, Yisu Remy Wang, Oliver Flatt, David Cao, Philip Zucker, Eli Rosenthal, Zachary Tatlock, and Max Willsey. Better Together: Unifying Datalog and Equality Saturation. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , 7(PLDI), jun 2023. 

# 10 Appendix/Supplemental Material for the Main Paper 24 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Fig. 12: A comparison for representation of space of terms using VSA, FTA, ECTA and LTA. 

10.1 A Detailed Comparison of FTA, VSA, ECTA and LTA with examples. 

Several data structures could in principle be used to represent large spaces of can-didate programs, including Version Space Algebras [22], e-graphs [2] and Finite Tree Automata (FTA) [5]. In particular, FTA have been shown to be effective in representing the space of untyped programs, satisfying a set of input-output examples [11], as well as simply-typed programs [21, 5]. However, these repre-sentations are insufficient for synthesis under refined library and query specifica-tions, where correctness depends on enforcing logical implication and semantic relationships between subterms. The reason is that these data structures have limited capability at best to relate sub-programs in their structure. A typical example which standard FTA and VSA fail to recognize is the set of terms { f (t, t ) | t ∈ { f1, f 2, f 3} }, where fi

are symbols in the language of FTA. Note that to correctly represent this space, the automata must relate the two subtrees representing the two arguments to 

f . Figure 12 shows (from left to right) the VSA and FTA for the unconstrained space { f (t1, t 2)|ti ∈ { f1, f 2, f 3} }. A VSA has two kind of nodes, a union node 

( S ), representing a union of all its children, and a join node ( ▷◁ ), representing a function application to all the terms represented by its children. An FTA can also be understood in a similar fashion with states ( q○) as analogous to the VSA 

union nodes and transitions ( . ) similar to the join nodes . Note that in the figure both the FTA and VSA fail to restrict both sub-trees for f to be identical and thus accept all possible terms like { f (fi, f j ) | i, j ∈ { 1, 2, 3}} .

To represent such constrained spaces over trees, constrained FTA have been explored [5, 21] allowing syntactic equality and dis-equality constraints between sub-terms. For instance, the CTA (third figure in Figure 12) shows such a con-Liquid Tree Automata 25 

strained FTA for the above example, where both sub-trees are constrained to be identical using a constraint on the transition ( l = r ), where l and r are variables capturing paths in the automata. Consequently, the FTA will only accept terms of the form {f (fi, f j ) | fi = fj }Unfortunately, these syntactically constrained automata too fall short when attempting to capture the space of programs with refined logical specifications, of the kind we need for the refined variant of our motivating example. For instance, consider a slightly modified example of terms { f (t1, t 2)|t1, t 2 ∈ { ϕ1, ϕ 2, ϕ 3}∧ t1 =⇒ t2 } with ϕi being logical predicates from a decidable logic fragment. The CTA definition is lacking both in allowing such formulas in the structure as well as constraining the space to accept these logically constrained terms. The challenge is primarily because, a) extended FTA cannot allow logical predicates as symbols in the automata as is the case here. b) The constraints in CTA allow only syntactic comparison between sub-terms, while the task at hand requires capturing logical or semantic relations. Such terms arise naturally in domains like program semantics, deductive reasoning and richer type systems, particularly capturing the sub-typing relations in these richer types. 

10.2 syntax and Semantics for λlta                                                                                                                                                                                          

> x,f∈Variables
> α∈Type Variables
> Q∈Refinement Variables
> d∈Constructors ::= () |true |false |O|S|Cons |Nil
> c∈Constants ::= B|N|Z|. . . |dc
> v∈Value ::= c|λ(x:τ). e|x|Λ(α:κ). e|Λ(Q:t). ee∈Expression ::= v|let x=ein e|if vthen eelse e|vv|v[t] |v[Q]
> t∈Base-Type ::= int |bool |. . . |t list |t tree t. . . |t→t|ατ∈Type ::= { ν:t|ϕ}|(x:τ)→τσ∈Type Schema ::= τ| ∀ α:t.σ| ∀ (Q: t). σϕ∈Qualifiers ::= true |false |κ Q (xi)| ¬ ϕ|ϕ∧ϕ|ϕ∨ϕ|ϕ⇒ϕ| ∀ (x : t). ϕ| ∃ (x : t). ϕΓ∈Type Context ::= ∅|Γ, x : τ|Γ,ϕ|Γ,g:τ|Γ, α :κ|Γ,Q: t

Fig. 13: Extended λLTA Expressions and Types with parametric polymorphism and abstract refinement variables 26 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Expression Typing Γ ⊢A e : σ

T-var R(A, Γ ) Γ (x) = σΓ ⊢A x : σ T-fun R(A, Γ ) Γ ∪ (x : τ1) ⊢A e : τ2

Γ ⊢A λ(x : τ1).e : τ1 → τ2

T-App 

R(A, Γ )

Γ ⊢A e1 : ( x : τ1 → τ2) Γ ⊢A e2 : τ1

Γ ⊢A e1e2 : τ2[e2/x] T-If 

Γ ⊢A e : {ν : bool | ϕ} Γ, ϕ ⊢A et : τΓ, ¬ϕ ⊢A ef : τ R(A, Γ )

Γ ⊢A if (e) then et else ef : τ

T-Subtype 

Γ ⊢A e : σ1 Γ ⊢A σ1 <: σ2

R(A, Γ )

Γ ⊢A e : σ2

T-Gen-T R(A, Γ ) Γ ⊢A e : σ α / ∈ F V (Γ )

Γ ⊢A Λα. e : ∀α.σ T-Let 

R(A, Γ ) Γ ⊢A e : τ1

Γ ∪ (x : τ1) ⊢A e1 : τΓ ⊢A let x = e in e : τ

T-Inst-T 

R(A, Γ )

Γ ⊢A e : ∀α.σ Γ ⊢wf At

Γ ⊢A e [t] : σ[t/α ] T-Gen-P 

R(A, Γ )

Γ ∪ (Q : t) ⊢A e : σΓ ⊢A ΛQ : t.e : ∀Q : t.σ 

T-Inst-P 

R(A, Γ )

Γ ⊢A e : ∀Q : t.σ Γ ⊢A ϕ : t

Γ ⊢A e [ϕ] : σ[P/Q]

Fig. 14: Extended Typing Semantics for λLTA Expressions Liquid Tree Automata 27 

Well-Formedness Γ ⊢wf A τ

WF-Base 

R(A, Γ ) Γ ≡ xi : τi ∀i.Γ ⊢wf Aτi

Γ ∪ ν : t⊢wf AϕΓ ⊢wf A{ν : t | ϕ}

WF-ABS-E 

R(A, Γ )

Γ ∪ (x : τ1)⊢wf Aτ2

Γ ⊢wf A(x : τ1) → τ2

WF-Prim R(A, Γ ) t ∈ TΓ ⊢wf At

WF-pred R(A, Γ ) ϕ ∈ ΦΓ ⊢wf Aϕ

WF-Var R(A, Γ ) x ∈ V ars Γ ⊢wf A x

WF-ABS-α R(A, Γ ) Γ ∪ α : κ⊢wf AτΓ ⊢wf A ∀α.τ 

WF-ABS-Q R(A, Γ ) Γ ∪ Q : t⊢wf AτΓ ⊢wf A ∀Q : t.τ 

Subtyping Γ ⊢A σ1 <: σ2

T-Sub-Base 

R(A, Γ ) Γ ⊢wf A{ν : t | ϕ1}

Γ ⊢wf A{ν : t | ϕ2} Γ ⊨ ϕ1 ⇒ ϕ2

Γ ⊢A {ν : t | ϕ1} <: {ν : t | ϕ2}

T-Sub-Arrow R(A, Γ ) Γ ⊢A τ21 <: τ11 Γ ⊢A τ12 <: τ22 

Γ ⊢A (x : τ11 ) → τ12 <: ( x : τ21 ) → τ22 

T-Sub-TVar R(A, Γ ) Γ ⊢A σ1 <: σ2

Γ ⊢A ∀α.σ 1 <: ∀α.σ 2

T-Sub-PVar R(A, Γ ) Γ, (Q : t) ⊢A σ1 <: σ2

Γ ⊢A ∀Q : t.σ 1 <: ∀Q : t.σ 2

Fig. 15: Extended Typing Semantics for well-formedness and subtyping of 

λlta terms. 28 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

10.3 Liquid Tree Automata Construction: Extended Rules Liquid Tree Automata 29 

Well-formedness F, A ⊢ wf f ∈ F (qi) ψ

,−→q

wf-prim t ∈ TF qt /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ wf t() ,−→qt

wf-pred ϕ ∈ ΦF qϕ /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ wf ϕ, −→qϕ

wf-var x ∈ Vars F qx /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ wf x, −→qx

wf-base (τ ≡ { x : t | ϕ}) ∈ τF qτ /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ wf τ (qx, q t, q ϕ),−→qτ

wf-arrow 

(τ→ ≡ τi → τj ) ∈ τF

τi, τ j ∈ τF qτ→ /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ wf ττ →(qτi , q τj ),−→qτ→

wf-t-abs 

qα, q τ ∈ Qψ = qtabs ▶ tvar .type = qtabs ▶ type .base 

F, A ⊢ wf tabs (qα, q τ ) ψ

,−→qtabs 

Q-goal 

φ = ( xi : τi) → τ qterm k , q τ ∈ Qqgoal ∈ Qf

ψ = SubType (qterm k ▶ type , q goal ▶ type )

F, A ⊢ wf goal (qτ , q term k ) ψ

,−→qgoal 

Transitions F, A ⊢ f ∈ F (qi) ψ

,−→q

e-α Fresh (α) qα /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ α() ,−→qα

e-κ Fresh (κ) qκ /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ κ() ,−→qκ

e-var x : τ ∈ F qx /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ x(qτ ),−→qx

e-τ -shape 

κ() ,−→qκ, α () ,−→qα ∈ ∆ν() ,−→qν ∈ ∆qτ /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ τ (qν , q α, q κ),−→qτ e-app 

qf , q a ∈ Q τ (qi),−→qτ ∈ ∆ψ = SubType (qf ▶ out , q app ▶ type )∧

θ = [ qa ▶ ϵ/q f ▶ in ]

θ. (SubType (qa ▶ type , q f ▶ in )) 

F, A ⊢ app (qτ , q f , q a) ψ

,−→qapp 

e-const 

⊢ c : τ ∈ F 

qc /∈ Q

F, A ⊢ c(qτ ),−→qc e-if 

qb, q t, q f ∈ Q τ (qi),−→qτ ∈ ∆ψ = (( qb ▶ ref ) ∧ SubType (qt ▶ type , q if ▶ type )) ∧

(¬(qb ▶ ref ) ∧ SubType (qf ▶ type , q if ▶ type )) 

F, A ⊢ if (qτ , q b, q t, q f ) ψ

,−→qif 

e-infer 

δ = f (qτ , q i) ψ

,−→ q δτ ∈ δ ▶ τ = ( qν , q α, q κ),−→qτ

R(A, Γ ) Solve (Γ, ψ, JqαK, JqκK) = ( Mκ, M α)

F, A ⊢ (Mκ, M α).δ τ

Jθ = [ δ ▶ p/δ ▶ p′]K = [ x/y | δp ∈ δ ▶ p, δ p′ ∈ δ ▶ p′, y = Symbol (δp), x = Symbol (δp′ )] 

(3) 

Fig. 16: Rules for constructing transitions ∆, basis for WF and Transition. 

with rules E-α, E-κ and E-infer 30 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

10.4 LTA Reductions Liquid Tree Automata 31 

Pruning A ⊢ ∆ ⇝ ∆′ | A ⊢ δ ⇝ψa δ′

p-trans 

δ ≡ f (. . . ) ψj ∧... 

,−−−−→q ψj ≡ θ.p 1(= |⊨)p2

∆r = {δr | A ⊢ (δp1,i ∈ δ ▶ p1) ⇝ψj δr }A ⊢ ∆ ⇝ ∆[δ ▶ p/∆ r ]

δ ≡ f (. . . ) ψj ∧... 

,−−−−→q ψj ≡ p1 = p2

δp1,i ∈ δ ▶ p1 δp2,j ∈ δ ▶ p2

δr = ⊓Syntax (δp1,i , δ p2,j )

A ⊢ δp1,i ⇝ψj δr p-syn-eq 

δ ≡ f (. . . ) ψj ∧... 

,−−−−→q ψj ≡ θ.p 1 ⊨ p2

δp1,i ∈ δ ▶ p1 δp2,j ∈ δ ▶ p2

δr = ⊓ψj

Semantics (δp1,i , δ p2,j )

A ⊢ δp1,i ⇝ψj δr p-sem-ent 

⊓ψ

Semantics (δi, δ j ) = 



δi σ(ψj ) = θ.⋆ ⊨ ⋆, Symbol (δi) = ϕi, Symbol (δj ) = ϕj ,

Given the automaton A, s.t. R(Γ, A)

JΓ K ∧ JθK.JϕiK =⇒ Jϕj K

δ⊥ otherwise 

(4) 

Similarity A ⊢ sim δi ≲ δj | A ⊢ E ⇝ E′

s-trans 

ψ<: = SubType (δi ▶ type , δ j ▶ type )

δ⊥ /∈ ⊓ ψ<:

Semantics (δi ▶ type , δ j ▶ type )

A ⊢ sim δi ≲ δj

s-eq 

(δi, δ j ) /∈ E A ⊢ sim δi ≲ δj

A ⊢ E ⇝ E ∪ { (δi, δ j )}

Minimization (A, E) ⊢ ∆ ⇝ ∆′ | ⊢ (A, E) ⇝ (A′, E′)

m-trans 

δi, δ j ∈ ∆ (δi, δ j ) ∈ E 

δi ≡ f (q1, q 2, . . . q j . . . q n) ψi

,−→qi

δj ≡ f ′(q′

> 1

, q ′

> 2

, . . . q ′

> m

) ψj

,−→qj

∆′ = S 

> k

{δk [qj 7 → qi]

| δk = ˆf ( ˆ q1, qj, . . . ˆqm) ,→ ˆqk }

(A, E) ⊢ ∆ ⇝ (∆ ∪ ∆′) \ { δj }A ≡ (Q, F, Q f , ∆ ) (A, E) ⊢ ∆ ⇝⋆ ∆′

⊢ (A, E) ⇝ (( Q, F, Q f , ∆ ′), ∅) m-LTA 

Fig. 17: Complete set of Similarity inference and LTA Minimization. 32 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Fig. 18: A LTA for the example library. The green arrow relates similar sets of transitions. 

Example To illustrate the irrelevant code pruning defined above we use the following example. 

Example 1. Consider a space of valid refinement-typed terms for a typing envi-ronment given as follows: [ { x : int | x ≥ 0 }, y : int, f : (a : { ν : int | a ≥ 0}) →

{ν : int | (a == 0) =⇒ ν ≥ a ∧ ((a > 0) =⇒ ν ≤ a}), g : { ν : int | mod (ν)

≥ 0} → bool] . Figure 18 shows a partial LTA for the space of terms of sizes up to 1 function call, constructed using the rules in Figure 7 for the given typing environment. The irrelevant portion of the LTA is shown in the dashed block with label 4○ The p-trans rule when applied on the transition app (call it δapp ) up-dates this transition using constraints on δapp . The constraint has two con-juncts; here, we just consider the semantic entailment constraint ( ψj = arg.ref ⊨

fun.in.ref ) (( 1 ○)), shown in green. Rule p-Sym-ent thus applies and reduces it to 

δapp ⇝ψj =arg .ref ⊨fun .in .ref δ′

app . This rule calculates δapp ▶ arg .ref , which in the figure is ϕx ( 2 ○) and δapp ▶ fun .in .ref , which includes two set of transitions, 

ϕf (( 3 ○)) and ϕg (( 4 ○)). Finally the ⊓Semantics (ϕx, ϕg ) is δ⊥, as the check, (∀ν.ν ≥ 1 ⊨ mod (ν) ≥ 0) does not hold. On the other hand, ⊓Semantics (ϕx,

ϕf ) is non-δ⊥. Thus, ϕg (( 4 ○)) is reduced to δ⊥, which upon normalization, leads to reduction of whole transition corresponding to function g, shown in red as irrelevant. To illustrate, the similarity based minimization, consider Figure 18 again, using s-trans rules between the transitions for x and y, shown in the box with label Similar , the ψ<: constraint is shown in the blue box. Since, the constraint holds (under variable renaming), these two transitions are marked as similar (shown by the green arrow) and added to E. The m-trans rule finally uses this similarity information to remove the transition for y while keeping x.Liquid Tree Automata 33 

10.5 Synthesis Details and Implementation 

In the LTA construction and pruning rules and the LTASynthesize algorithm above, for ease of illustration, we have abstracted away several details about how we maintain variable scoping, infer types for transitions, and do efficient term extraction. Below, we discuss some of these along with several other details. We use the following example to illustrate these details. For illustration, we will consider a library F = [ f : (l : { ν : [a] | len ( ν) > 0 }) → { ν : [a] | len( ν) = len(l) }; xs : { ν : [int] | len ( ν) = 1} ; ys : [char]; g : (l : [char]) → [char]]. Figure 19 shows a portion of minimized LTA for terms of size two with transition app for this library. 

Fig. 19: An Example LTA, portions shaded out for elucidation. 

Variable Scoping and Typing En-vironment in LTA The details of variable scoping during LTA construc-tion and pruning are important to un-derstand how enumeration works with refinement types in a LTA. To sim-plify scoping decisions and manage the typing environment, we made sev-eral design choices. First, we require terms in our synthesis language λlta to be in A-normal form, and to have a unique binding variable ti for each application and conditional term. We also refactor each library function specification, alpha-renaming all ar-gument variables . This allows us to avoid unwanted variable capture across library functions without ex-plicitly keeping track of scope infor-mation about bound and free vari-ables. Additionally, to build the typing environment, each term binding variable in ANF is ascribed a set of possible types that can be associated with it. To implement this structurally in LTA, we extend each n-ary expression transition (e.g. app transition) in the LTA, to (n+1) arity with an additional incoming edge for the type of the resulting expression (e.g., function application term). See, for example, the arrows with label type in Figure 19 for the app transition that has an edge ( qτ → app ), qτ to represent a set of valid types that can be ascribed to the application term (described next). Finally, we build a global typing environment mapping each expression type (annotated and inferred) with the binding variable using a typing environment construction function. This function is derived from a relation relating LTAs to typing environments; details are provided in the next section. 34 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Typing Environment Relation for ARQ(q, Γ )

R∆(δ, Γ )

R(A, Γ )

RQ-Var δ ≡ x(qτ ) ψ

,−→q

RQ(q, {(x : Jqτ K)}) RQ-Const δ ≡ c(qτ ) ψ

,−→q

RQ(q, (c : Jqτ K)) 

RQ-GEN 

δ ≡ f (q1, q 2, . . . , q n, q τ ) ψ

,−→q

RQ(q, Γ ) R∆(δ, Γ ′)

RQ(q, (Γ ∪ Γ ′)) R∆-GEN 

δ ≡ f (q1, q 2, . . . , q n, q τ ) ψ

,−→q

Fresh (vδ ) i ∈ [1 . . . n ]. RQ(qi, Γ i)

R∆(δ, (S 

> i∈[1 ...n ]

Γi) ∪ { (vδ : Jf. type K)})

R-EMPTY R(A, ∅) R-FINAL 

q ∈ Qf R(A, Γ )

RQ(q, Γ ′)

R(A, Γ ∪ Γ ′)

R-TERM 

q ∈ Q R(A, Γ )

∄(f (q1, q 2, . . . , q n, q τ ) ψ

,−→q) ∈ ∆ RQ(q, Γ ′)

R(A, Γ ∪ Γ ′)

Fig. 20: Inductively defined Relation R, capturing the relation between A and the Typing Environment Γ . A little abuse of notation for presentation, denotation for a type node (and edge) Jqτ K is a singleton set, and we use it to also denote the element in the set in Rules RQ-Var , RQ-Const and R∆-GEN Liquid Tree Automata 35 

The inference rules in Fig 1 define a relation R(A, Γ ), that holds iff we can construct Γ using A. The rules are constructive, giving a way to construct 

Γ from A using two other relations – a state-environment relation RQ(q, Γ ),capturing the construction of an environment from a sub-automaton rooted at a state q; and a transition-environment relation R∆(δ, Γ ), capturing environment construction from a given transition δ.

R-EMPTY is the base rule, which says that R(A, ∅) holds for any automa-ton A. Operationally, it means we can construct an empty environment from any automaton A. Rules RQ-Var construct an environment with a singleton pair, mapping a variable x to the denotation of the state qτ , which is a singleton set containing the type for x (see Fig. 7 in the paper for definition). Intuitively, we are adding each type-annotated variable pair ( x, τ ) to the environment. RQ-Const 

does a similar construction for type annotated constants, using corresponding transitions. 

RQ-GEN is a generic state-environment rule applicable to any transition target state q. It says, given a constructed environment Γ from q (possibly con-structed by some other transition) and an environment Γ ′, constructed from this transition, we can take the union of Γ ′ and Γ to construct the new environment from q.

R∆-GEN similarly is a generic transition-environment construction rule. It says, given environments ( Γi) constructed from each of the incoming states qi,we can construct a new extended environment from the current transition by taking a union of Γi and adding a new pair for the type of the current transition (refereed by the position f .type), mapped to a fresh variable for the transition 

vf .Finally, R-TERM and R-Final construct a typing environment for the automata by adding the environments for each terminal states (states with no outgoing transition) and final states. Collectively, these rules allow us to construct a typing environment corre-sponding to any given automata A.36 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

10.6 Resolving Refinement Predicates for type Edges in Transitions 

LTA construction and pruning also rely on inferring a set of feasible types for each transition. For instance see the incoming state ( qτ → app ) in the example. The possible set of types is shown using a transition ( {ν : α1 | κ1} →

qτ○), constructed using Transitions construction rules E-α, E-κ and E-τ -shape 

in Figure 7. Inferring this type set precisely requires inferring the base type for type vari-able α1 and the refinement predicate (here κ1). We earlier skipped the principal rule E-infer for inferring possible values for these variables. The E-infer rules fetches each type transition for a given transition δ using, construct a typing environment consistent with the automata A, using R and uses a auxiliary con-straint solving procedure Solve to solve the constraint over these typing and refinement variables in ψ thus infering corresponding mappings Mα and Mκ.Inferring Mα is relatively straightforward using syntactic comparison between terms at constrained location, e.g., the given constraint relating function and argument type structure allows us to infer in this case that the type of the appli-cation term is [ int ]. Inferring Mκ is more convoluted and needs some elucidation. We use the transition constraints ψ to generate logical implication relations over these refinement variables. For instance, consider semantic constraint d ○ d○, ψj = [ arg /fun .in ]. fun .out .ref 

⊨ type .ref . To translate this to constraints over variables, we get the symbols at these positions and constrtaint these symbols according to ψj . For instance, 

δ ▶fun .in = { l }, δ ▶arg = { xs , ys }, however, ys we can ignore for our example as it does not satisfy a○ and thus will be pruned out. Thus we will have θ =[xs /l]. Next δ ▶fun .out .ref = { ϕf } and δ ▶type .ref = { κ1}. Now relating these sets using ψ we get a constraint: (i) len (ν) = len (l) ⊨

κ1. Similarly b○ will give us another constraint (ii) len (ν) = 1 ⊨ len (ν) > 0. Now, to solve these constraints; a) we perform these checks in a consistent typing environment Γ mapping variables occurring free in these constraint with types. For instance, for our example we have ( xs : { ν : [int] | len (ν) = 1}) ∈ Γ . b) We must lift these ⊨ checks in the logical implication checks using our earlier discussed interpretation J.K. This along with the substitution in d○ gives us the following logical constraint. Jxs : {ν : [ int ] | len (ν) = 1 }K ∧ (∀ν. len (ν) = 1 =⇒

len (ν) > 0) 

∧ [xs /l](len (ν) = len (l) =⇒ κ1). Using the JK semantics, this translates to: ( len (xs ) = 1) ∧ true ∧ [xs /l] ( len 

(ν) = len (xs ) =⇒ κ1). Thus giving us a possible values of Mκ as [ κ1 7 → len (ν)= 1]. 

10.7 Handling Cycles Definition 6 (Dependency Graph and Cyclic States). Given a Liquid Tree Automaton A = ( Q, F, Q f , ∆ ), we define its dependency graph as a di-Liquid Tree Automata 37 

rected graph G∆ = ( Q, E ), where an edge (q′, q ) ∈ E exists if there exists a transition rule f (q1, . . . , q n) ψ

−→ q ∈ ∆ such that q′ = qi for some 1 ≤ i ≤ n.A state q ∈ Q is cyclic , denoted q ∈ Qcyc , if there exists a non-empty path from q to itself in G∆ (q →+ q). Otherwise, the state is acyclic ( q ∈ Qacyc ). 

Definition 7 (Well-formed LTA Constraints ). A constrained transition 

t = f (q1, . . . , q n) ψ

−→ q ∈ ∆ is well-formed if and only if every position referenced within its constraint ψ resolves to an acyclic state. Formally, let 

pos ∈ { 1, . . . , n } be a position index referenced in ψ in a transition δ. We require: 

∀p ∈ positions (ψ) = ⇒ δ ▶ p ∈ Qacyc .An LTA A satisfies the structural acyclic constraint restriction if all transi-tions t ∈ ∆ are well-formed. 38 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

10.8 Details of Soundness and Completeness Theorems and Proofs 

For a given upper bound k on the size of programs being synthesized, the LTA-Synthesize algorithm is both sound and complete. 

Soundness .

Theorem 3 (Soundness). Given a type environment Γ that relates library functions fi = λ(xi,j ).e fi with their refinement types fi : ( xi,j : τi,j ) → { ν : ti |

ϕi} ∈ Γ , and a synthesis query φ = ( yi : τi) → { ν : t | ϕ}, if LTASynthesize 

(Γ, φ, k) =( Amin , Terms = {e | e ∈ JAmin K }), then ∀e ∈ Terms , Γ ⊢ e : φ,where Γ is consistent with Amin .

Informally Stated: Programs synthesized by the LTASynthesize procedure are correct with respect to the provided query specification Ψ assuming the validity of each library function against their specifications. We assume that every library has a correct type annotation using the follow-ing annotation correctness assumption. 

Proposition 1 (Annotation correctness). ∀ g ∈ F , and the query φ =

(xi : τi) → τ , if g has an annotated type τ , then F, x i : τi ⊢ g : τ .

We begin with defining an important Lemma for proving the soundness the-orem: 

Lemma 1 ( Liquid Tree Automaton Denotation Correctness). 

Assuming, the type annotation in the library and query arguments are correct, 

∀ Liquid Tree Automata Aq, rooted at a node q, ∀ e ∈ JAqK. F, A ⊢ e : φ.

Where F, A ⊢ e : φ. is same as Γ ⊢A e : φ given Γ = F and R(A, Γ )

Proof. The proof is using induction on the construction of the automaton, using automata construction rules. 

– We first take the base cases for well-formedness rules. Enumerate 

– Cases of well-formedness of wf-prim , wf-pred , wf-base and wf-arrow ,are trivially true as these are not expressions and our typing systems assumes any well-formed type or predicate has a higher-order kind. 

– Case E-const :

• Given a constant c : τ ∈ F • Assumption Correct Annotation, F ⊢ c : τ

• The automaton constructed for c is given by c(qτ ) ,→ qc

• Using J.K definition. JAqc K = c : τ .

• Which holds using assumption. 

– Case E-var : This case is similar to e-const .

– Case E-app :

• Using IH, for each f ∈ Jqf K (Henceforth, using qf for Aqf , by the defi-nition of automata rooted at a state), F, A ⊢ f : qf ▶ type and a ∈ JqaK

F, A ⊢ a : qa ▶ type Liquid Tree Automata 39 

• Jqapp K = Japp (qτ , q f , q a)K.

• Let us assume f ∈ Jqf K, then by IH, F, A ⊢ f : τin → τout for some τin 

and τout .

• Similarly a ∈ JqaK, F, A ⊢ a : τa.

• The constraint ψ in the E-app conclusion, by construction (using the 

SubType equation, enforces that the τa <: τin 

• Using the above two premise, for each term app (f, a ) ∈ Jqapp K we have the premise to apply Expression typing rule T-App (Figure 15), with 

F, A as Γ . (variable to type mapping construction for A is straight-forward so skipped). 

• Using T-App , app (f, a ) ∈ Jqapp K F, Aapp (f, a ) ⊢ τout .

• Again, ψ in the E-app ensures that qapp ▶ type <: τout .

• Finally, using the standard subtyping rule F, Aapp (f, a ) ⊢ τapp , giving the required proof. 

– Case for construction of type-level function application e-inst-t is similar and uses T-inst-T rule in place T-app rule. 

– Case E-if :

• Using IH, for each b ∈ JqbK (Henceforth, using qf for Aqf , by the defini-tion of autoamat rooted at a state), F, A ⊢ b : qb ▶ type and et ∈ JqtK

F, A ⊢ et : qt ▶ type and ef ∈ Jqf K F, A ⊢ ef : qf ▶ type 

• Jqif K = Jif (qτ , q b, q t, q f )K.

•• Let us assume b ∈ JqbK, then by IH, F, A ⊢ b : {ν : bool | ϕb} for some 

ϕb.

• Similarly et ∈ JqtK, F, A ⊢ et : τt and for ef ∈ Jqf K F, A ⊢ ef : τf

• The constraint ψ in the E-if conclusion, by construction (using the Sub-Type equation, enforces that the F, A, ϕ b ⊢ τet <: τeif .

• Also constraint ψ in the E-if conclusion, by construction (using the 

SubType equation, enforces that the F, A, ¬ϕb ⊢ τef <: τeif .

•• Using the above two premise, for each term if (b, e t, e f ) ∈ Jqif K we have the premise to apply Expression typing rule T-If (Figure 15), with F, A

as Γ .

• Using T-if , if (b, e t, e f ) ∈ Jqif K F, Aif (b, e t, e f ) ⊢ τif .

– Case e-let : This case has the similar argument as the e-app and e-if .

Lemma 2 ( Prune preserves Denotation Correctness). 

Assuming, the type annotation in the library and query arguments are correct, 

∀ Liquid Tree Automata Aq, rooted at a node q, ∀ e ∈ JAqK. F, A ⊢ e : φ.

Where F, A ⊢ e : φ. is same as Γ ⊢A e : φ given Γ = F and R(A, Γ )

Proof. 

Lemma 3 ( Minimize preserves Denotation Correctness). 

Assuming, the type annotation in the library and query arguments are correct, 

∀ Liquid Tree Automata Aq, rooted at a node q, ∀ e ∈ JAqK. F, A ⊢ e : φ.

Where F, A ⊢ e : φ. is same as Γ ⊢A e : φ given Γ = F and R(A, Γ )40 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Proof. 

Theorem 4 (Soundness). Given a type environment Γ that relates library functions fi = λ(xi,j ).e fi with their refinement types fi : ( xi,j : τi,j ) → { ν : ti |

ϕi} ∈ Γ , and a synthesis query φ = ( yi : τi) → { ν : t | ϕ}, if LTASynthesize 

(Γ, φ, k) =( Amin , Terms = {e | e ∈ JAmin K }), then ∀e ∈ Terms , Γ ⊢ e : φ,where Γ is consistent with Amin .

The proof is based on the previous denotation correctness lemma that every term in the language of a Liquid Tree Automaton is well typed; and the fact that the LTASynthesize generates a LTA, where the final state(s) are target of a transition with a type φ.

Proof. – If A = LTASynthesize (F, φ, k), then it must be a return value at either at line 11 or line 3 in the Algorithm. We consider the following two cases: 

– Case A = A0 at Line 3: Enumerate 

– From Line 3, the initially constructed LTA A0 has a solution. 

– Using the definition for NEmpty , ∃qf ∈ Qf 0 such that Jqf K̸ = ∅.

– Now such a state qf must have been constructed by WF , rule using the query 

φ, such that qf ▶ type = φ.

– Using the Denotional Correctness Lemma 1, ∀e ∈ Jqf K, F, A ⊢ e : φ

– Case A = Amin at Line 11: This is a more involved case with two main differences from the earlier case; Additional call to Transition at line 6. Plus calls to 

prune , similarity and minimize (lines 7-9). Enumerate 

– From Line 11, the minimized LTA Amin has a solution. 

– Let us consider the automata A at line 6. 

– Using the definition for NEmpty , ∃qf ∈ Qf such that Jqf K̸ = ∅.

– Now such a state qf must have been constructed by WF , rule, Q-goal for the given query φ, such that qf ▶ type = φ.

– Now, using the Denotaional Correctness Lemma 1, ∀e ∈ Jqf K, F, A ⊢ e : φ.

– Additionally using Lemma 2 if Ar = prune (JAK) then ( JAKr) ⊆ (JAK) and JAKr

preserve denotation correctness. 

– Similarly, from Lemma 3, given Ar = minimize (JAK, E), for some sound simi-larity relation E, then Ar ⊆ (JAK) and and JAKr preserve denotation correctness. 

– Thus using the soundness of the Similarity function, 

– Additionally from 6 and 7 we have JArK ⊆ JAK.

– Finally Using 5 and 9, we have ∀e ∈ Jqf K, F, A ⊢ e : φLiquid Tree Automata 41 

10.9 Completeness Theorem 5 (Completeness). Given a type environment Γ that relates library functions fi = λ(xi,j ).e fi with their refinement types fi : ( xi,j : τi,j ) → { ν : ti |

ϕi} ∈ Γ , and a synthesis query φ = ( yi : τi) → { ν : t | ϕ}, if LTASynthesize 

(Γ, φ, k), = ⊥, then ∄ a term e ∈ JAcomplete K containing fewer than k +1 library function calls, such that Γ ⊢ e : φ and Γ is consistent with Acomplete . Where 

Acomplete is the complete LTA of size k, for the given Γ , generated without any reduction. 

We begin with the definition of Small subset relation between search spaces. Let us define a search space of all the well-typed terms of size less than k +1 as Sk. The LTASynthesize algorithm without reductions (i.e. prune and 

minimize ) (where we naturally add all transitions and states based on L and typing rules) is exhaustive over this search space. Let us call the search space of the LTASynthesize with reductions as Skreducced .

Definition 8 (Small-subset). Given a library F and an automaton A. A search space Sk is a finite set of all possible well-typed expressions | e |≤ k

of length upto k. A small-subset Sk’ ⊆ Sk is a search space such that if ∃ awell-typed λLTA expression e ∈ Sk, then ∃e′ ∈ Sk’ such that if F, A ⊢ e′ : τ ′,and F, A ⊢ e : τ , then τ ′ <: τ .

Since a LTA of size k is a representation of a search space of terms upto size 

k, we can generalize this definition to Small-Subset-LTA , using the denotation function for the LTA. 

Definition 9 (Small-LTA). Given a LTA A, a LTA A’ is a small-LTA for A,(written as A’ ⊂small A) if the search space JA′K, is a small-subset of the search space JAK

Definition 10 (Small-LTA-modulo-query). Given a LTA A, a LTA A’ is a small-LTA-modulo-query for A and a given query φ, (written as A’ ⊂φ

small 

A) if the search space JA′K, is a small-subset of the search space JAK, for any 

F, Ae : φ.

To prove the required goal for completeness, we go in three steps: 

– First we proof, that if ∃ e, | e| ≤ k, such that F, JAcomplete K ⊢ e : φ, then 

LTASynthesize without Prune and Minimize will produce an automaton 

Acomplete , such that e ∈ JAcomplete K.

– We prove that the LTASynthesize with Minimize always produces an automata A which maintains a Small-LTA property with respect to the complete automata. 

– We prove that prune (A) always produces an automata Ar, such that Ar

is a small-LTA-modulo-query for A modulo the query φ.

– Use the sub-typing judgement to prove that if there exists a solution in 

Acomplete , then there must exists a solution in A42 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

Lemma 4 (LTASynthesize-NoReduction-is-Complete). Let us assume that both Prune and Minimize are identity function, thus having no effect on the transitions. Let us call this variant of LTASynthesize as LTASynthesize (-All) . ∀e, | e| ≤ k, Iff F ⊢ e : φ, then e ∈ JAcomplete K, where Acomplete =

LTASynthesize (-All) . ( F, φ,k)Proof. The proof follows is by contradiction: 

– Let assume that ∃e′, | e′| ≤ k and F ⊢ e′ : φ.

– This would mean that that there exists a typing derivation in λlta for e′, this holds by the soundness of the underlying type system for λlta (Assumption 1). 

– Given that the transition addition rules exactly mimic the typing judgments in 

λlta and in LTASynthesize (-All) no transition is ever removed from Acomplete .

– Thus wlog, if we assume that term e′ = f (e1, . . . e n) then, there must be a corre-sponding transition rule which adds a transition f (q1, . . . q n) ψ

,−→q ∈ ∆complete ,with q ▶ type = φ.

– Thus using the definition for J·K, e′ ∈ JAcomplete K.

– Contradicts our initial assumption, thus ∀e, | e| ≤ k, Iff F ⊢ e : Ψ , then e ∈

JAcomplete K.

Lemma 5 (Minimize-produces-small-subset-LTA). The Minimize (A, E)routine always produces an automaton Amin such that Amin ⊂small A.Proof. We prove this using contradiction, let us assume that it is not the case that Amin ⊂small A.

– By definition of ⊂small , ∃e ∈ JAK, with F, A ⊢ e : τ , such that ∄e′ ∈ JArK, such that F, A ⊢ e′ : τ ′ and τ ′ <: τ ′.

– If e ∈ JArK, it is a trivial case as the assumption is trivially false, proving the lemma. 

– Let us say that e /∈ JArK, this could have happened only when s-trans would remove some transition δe, such that e ∈ JδeK or e ∈ JqeK, where qe is a target state of δe.

– In both cases however, similarity rules will ensure that ∃δ′ 

> e

such that δ′ 

> e

≲ δe.

– Using the definition of ≲, we must have that ∀e ∈ JδeK ∃e′ such that F, A ⊢ e : τ ,then F, A ⊢ e′ : τ ′ and τ ′ : τ. 

– This contradicts our assumption hence, Amin ⊂small A.

Lemma 6 (Prune-produces-small-subset-LTA). Given a query φ, the Prune 

(A) routine always produces an automaton Ar such that Ar ⊂φ

small A.Proof. This is by definition of Prune , which only reduces terms which could not be part of the solution. Finally, restating the completeness with a proof piggybacking on the above proven Lemmas. Liquid Tree Automata 43 

Theorem 6 (Completeness). Given a type environment Γ that relates library functions fi = λ(xi,j ).e fi with their refinement types fi : ( xi,j : τi,j ) → { ν : ti |

ϕi} ∈ Γ , and a synthesis query φ = ( yi : τi) → { ν : t | ϕ}, if LTASynthesize 

(Γ, φ, k), = ⊥, then ∄ a term e ∈ JAcomplete K containing fewer than k +1 library function calls, such that Γ ⊢ e : φ and Γ is consistent with Acomplete . Where 

Acomplete is the complete LTA of size k, for the given Γ , generated without any reduction. Proof. The proof for follows directly from the Lemma 4, Lemma 5 and Lemma 6. 

10.10 Informal Argument for Termination 

LTASynthesize (Algorithm 1) is guaranteed to terminate in a finite number of steps for a given max-depth k, and a starting minimized automaton of size m. The Transition routine potentially increments the depth to m’ >= m. Al-though Prune and Minimize can collapse states and transitions, and hence reduce the depth to a value less than m, we still guarantee termination by re-membering pruned transitions. 

Transition , Prune , and Minimize are deterministic implementations of the rules in Figures 7 and 8 in the main paper. The implementation of these functions memoizes previously pruned transitions to avoid infinite cycles among these three procedures. Thus, together: using a) the memoization, b) given that there are finitely many library functions, and c) a finite maximum size k bounds the algorithm, we are guaranteed that Algorithm always terminates. 44 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

10.11 Evaluation 10.12 Benchmark Construction Example 

Consider the second benchmark RevAppend in Figure 21 The original Hoogle query is [a] -> [a] . This is represented in Hoogle+ as follows: stack exec −− hplus −− disable −filter=False −− json= '{"query": "[a] → [a]", "inExamples": [], "inArgNames": ["z"]} '

One natural refinement of this is to reverse the original list and append it to the original. We can capture this using a refinement of the original query, using the I/O examples as follows in Hoogle+: stack exec −− hplus −− disable −filter=False −− json= '{"query": "[a] → [a]", "inExamples": [{ "inputs": ["[1,2,3,4]"], "output": "[1,2,3,4,4,3,2,1]"}, { "inputs": ["[1,3,5,6]"], "output": "[1,3,5,6,6,5,3,1]"}, { "inputs": ["[\"abcd\"]"], "output": "[\"abcddcba\"]"}], "inArgNames": ["z"]} '

Finally, we also create an analogous Hegel query, capturing the similar re-finement using Hegel’s specification language. We do this as follows using the 

mem and ord method predicates/Qualifiers. revApp : (z : [int]) →

{v : [int] | \(u : int), (w : int). mem (u, v) = true => mem (u , z) /\ len (v) == len (z) + len (z) /\ ord (u, w, z) = true => (ord (u, w, v) = true /\ ord (w, u, v) = true) }; 

10.13 Motivational Example 

Following we present the details of our main motivation example, without the library. Following is our main Hegel/Synquid Query: goal : (x:int) 

→ (y : int) 

→ (xs : [a]) 

→ { v : ([a], [a]) | len (fst (v)) <= x /\ (len (snd (v)) ⇐ len (xs) − y \/ len (snd (v) = 0)) /\ \(u : a). mem (fst (v). u) = true => mem (xs, u) /\ \(u : a). mem (snd (v), u) = true => mem (xs, u)}; Liquid Tree Automata 45 

Following is an equivalent, refined query in Hoogle+ tool: stack exec −− hplus −− disable −filter=False −− json= '{"query": "Int → Int →

[a] → ([a], [a])", "inExamples": [{ "inputs": ["1", "2", "[49, 62, 82, 54, 76]"], "output": "([49],[82,54,76])"}, { "inputs": ["2", "3", "[49, 62, 82, 54, 76]"], "output": "([49,62],[54,76])"}, { "inputs": ["3", "3", "[49, 62, 82, 54, 76]"], "output": "([49, 62, 82],[54, 76])"}], "inArgNames": ["x", "y", "z"]} '46 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

10.14 Complete Results Table for RQ1 

Name Original and Refined Queries Description #∧/∨ Refined Time(s)/# #S He H+ Sn Nth1 Swap i and j indexes in l 4 5.1 39.4 21.3 4Nth2 Swap i and j in reverse l 3 7.6 22.7 5Nth3 Increment values at, i, j, and swap 4 9.1 5RevApp1 Reverse l and append to itself 3 5.1 49.5 3RevApp2 Append l to itself and reverse 3 7.3 4RevApp3 Reverse l, append and reverse 4 5.4 4RevZip1 Reverse f and, zip it with s 3 6.1 43.2 22.6 4RevZip2 Reverse s and zip f with it 4 6.9 28.1 5RevZip3 Zip f and s, and reverse 4 8.5 6SplitAt Split l at index n; drop m element from second proj 4 6.8 32.1 5SplitAt2 Split l at index n; drop m element from first proj 5 7.3 24.3 4SplitAt3 Split l at index n; drop (n-m) element from second 4 7.8 5Nth_Incr1 Return (n+1)th element from l 3 5.2 35.4 36.8 3Nth_Incr2 Return (n-1)th element from l 4 7.4 56.3 5Nth_Incr3 Return nth element from l and increment it. 4 7.8 39.5 5CEdge1 True if src and tgt both are in l 4 6.4 21.5 4CEdge2 True if src or tgt is in l 4 5.2 23.7 3CEdge3 True if src is, but tgt not in l 5 8.6 5AppendN1 Append first n elements to l 4 6.0 47.7 4AppendN2 Append (n-1) elements to l 4 10.4 7⋆

AppendN3 Append last n elements to l 4 7.5 25.8 5SplitStr1 Split s at character c 4 6.5 5SplitStr2 Split s at character c and swap pair 4 5.2 36.2 5SplitStr3 Split s at c, and append c in the second proj 6 7.1 5LookRange1 Lookup k in the values 4 8.2 43.6 6⋆

LookRange2 Lookup k in values, else return last value 6 9.1 7⋆

LookRange3 Lookup k in values, else return first value 4 8.6 7⋆

Map1 † Map f on l and increment each element 5 7.5 6

Map2 † Map f on l and decrement each element 6 5.2 45.1 34.1 4

Map3 † Map f on l, increment each element, and reverse 5 5.0 33.5 29.8 4

MapDouble1 † Map f followed by g 4 10.8 5

MapDouble2 † Map g followed by f 4 8.9 4

MapDouble3 † Create composition of (f.g) and apply on l 6 8.4 42.8 4

ApplyNAdd1 † Apply f on m, n times and add m 6 7.9 5

ApplyNAdd2 † Apply f on m, n+1 times and add m 6 6.9 63.1 34.2 5

ApplyNAdd3 † Apply f on m, n+1 times and add m+1 6 9.1 6

ApplyNInv1 † Apply g and h on l, and filter using f 5 9.5 5

ApplyNInv2 † Filter l using f, and apply g and h 5 7.6 32.4 5

ApplyNInv3 † Apply g and h on l, filter using l, apply g and h. 6 8.1 55.6 5

ApplyList1 † Apply head of fl on s 4 12.3 8⋆

ApplyList2 † Apply last element of fl on s 4 10.5 8⋆

ApplyList3 † Apply all f ∈ fl in sequence. 5 7.9 42.6 6⋆

Fig. 21: Results for experiments with Refined Hoogle+ and ECTA benchmarks. Liquid Tree Automata 47 

10.15 Complete Results for RQ2                                                                                               

> Name Desc. #∧/∨Results Hegel LTA & SMT Stats T(Sn) T(He) #C #B #R #SMT SMT(s) |Q| | Q|min
> NLInsert Add a newsletter and user 622.7 16 231 110 11.12 779 212 126.2 NLRemove Remove a newsletter and user 439.9 20 435 189 19.34 1201 372 _NLR_Remove Read articles list and remove 542.8 19 421 213 18.20 1331 381 _NLInv Remove with unique-ness invariant 852.5 25 436 154 24.19 1398 435 _FWInsert Insert anormal de-vice 431.2 15 233 166 12.34 945 298 124.6 FWMkCentral Insert acentral de-vice 465.2 33 453 259 27.13 1611 401 FWInsConn Insert a device con-nected to all 536.8 14 259 218 15.12 806 261 FWInvert Invert the connec-tions 433.9 14 447 197 15.70 1176 323 FWInvertDel Delete, and invert connections 647.3 17 438 184 22.90 1352 421

Fig. 22: Results for tailored specification-guided synthesis benchmarks, The #C and #B gives the total number of function calls and branches in the synthesized solution. #R gives the number of transitions Hegel merged during the Similarity reduction and Irrelevant code pruning phases. 

10.16 Example Synthesis output for RQ2 

Given the query NLRRemove , the challenge is to synthesize a solution that main-tains a specific contract associated with each library function; these include the requirement that a) the user must be unsubscribed before removal, b) if the user has not opted for promotions , the email for the user must be cleared, etc. Figure 23 shows the synthesized program generated by Hegel for this query. Note that the solution includes a total of 19 function calls and exhibits complex control flows (4 branches). 48 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan  

> 1

(*nLRRemove : (n : nl) -> (u : user) ->  

> 2

(d : {v: [nlrecord] | mem (v , n , u)}) ->  

> 3

{v : ( f : article * s : [nlrecord]) |  

> 4

mem (f, articles (s))  

> 5

∧ ¬ nlmem (s, n, u)  

> 6

∧ (promotions (s, u) => email (s, u))  

> 7

}*)  

> 8

fun n u d ->  

> 9

let x = read (d, n, u) in  

> 10

let x0 = fst (x) in  

> 11

let d0 = snd (x) in  

> 12

let d1 = confirmU (d0, n, u) in  

> 13

let x1 = promotions (d1, n, u) in  

> 14

if (not (x1)) then  

> 15

let subscribed = subscribed (d1, n, u) in  

> 16

if (length (subscribed) > 0) then  

> 17

let d2 = clear_email (d1, n, u) in  

> 18

let d3 = unsubscribe (d2, n, u) in  

> 19

let d4 = remove (d3, n, u) in  

> 20

(x0, d4)  

> 21

else  

> 22

let d5 = unsubscribe (d1, n, u) in  

> 23

let d6 = remove (d5, n, u) in  

> 24

(x0, d6)  

> 25 26

else  

> 27

let d7 = unsubscribe (d1, n, u) in  

> 28

let d8 = remove (d7, n, u) in  

> 29

(x0, d8) 

Fig. 23: Synthesized Program for NLR_Remove Liquid Tree Automata 49 

10.17 RQ3: Impact of irrelevant code pruning and similarity reduction 

Because RQ3 cuts across both set of benchmarks, we perform several ablation experiments over the queries described in the Figures 21 and 22. We create three variants of Hegel , viz. (i) Hegel(-P) , a LTA-based synthesis implementation without the irrelevant code reduction (i.e. comment out the Prune call at line 7 in LTASynthesize Algorithm, but retaining similarity reduction ; (ii) Hegel(-S) , a variant of Hegel with support for pruning but without similarity reduction (i.e., lines 8 and 9 in Algorithm are commented out); and, (iii) Hegel(-All) , a baseline variant that constructs the LTA without performing any reduction (i.e., removes lines 7-9 in the algorithm). We compare these variants in terms of two main metrics, overall synthesis times and the size of the search space in each case after the reduction, shown by number of program terms enumerated during search, compared to the base-line ( Hegel(-All) .

Fig. 24: Comparison of Hegel and its variants Hegel , Hegel(-S) , Hegel(-P) , Hegel(-ALL) , on average synthesis times and the number of candidate terms generated on RQ1 and RQ2. The labels on each bar show the number of benchmarks solved by these variants out of 42 in the case of RQ1 and 9 in the case of RQ2. The first two charts in Figure 24 show results for overall average synthesis times across the two sets of benchmark queries described earlier. We note that both Hegel(-S) , and Hegel(-P) can solve all queries from RQ1, but at a cost which is 2 - 3X greater than Hegel . Hegel(-All) on the other hand fails on almost half of the benchmarks. In contrast, although Hegel(-P) was also able to solve the full complement of queries studied in RQ2, it did so with a considerable larger overhead compared to Hegel , while here the the irrelevant code pruning ( Hegel(-S) ) alone is insufficient to scale the variant to these challenging benchmarks and it fails to solve 3/9 benchmarks. The second pair of charts and show the average number of terms enumerated by these different variants, showing the reduction of search space by each reduction strategy, with Hegel(-All) as the baseline. Here we see, with the combined reduction strategies, Hegel sees the maximum search space reduction, while the other two variants Hegel(-P) and Hegel(-S) having 50 A. Mishra and S. Jagannathan 

much larger search spaces, (anywhere from 2-4.5X more) without necessarily solving the same number of queries.